




THE PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHA-NICS 
OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 




Physiological Mechanics 
of Piano Technique 


An experimental study of the nature of muscular 
action as used in piano playing, and of the effects 
thereof upon the piano key and the piano tone 


By 

OTTO ORTMANN 

Research Laboratory of the Peabody Conservatory of Music, 
Baltimore, Maryland 


WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS 


A counterpart of an earlier study on the Physical Basis of 
Piano Touch and Tone 


LONDON 

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD. 
NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON ik CO., INC. 

1929 



PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS, LTD., HERTFORD. 



CONTENTS 


chapter 

PART I 

THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

' PACE 

I. 

Mechanical Principles . . . . . 

. 3 

11. 

The Skeleton 

. 13 

III. 

The Muscles 

40 

IV. 

States and Properties of Muscles 

. 50 

V. 

The Neural and Circulatory Systems . 

. 64 


PART n 

GENERAL ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 


VI. 

Geometrics of Physiological Movement 

. 75 

VII. 

Action AND Reaction . . 

. 82 

VIII. 

Activity and Passivity .... 

. 90 

IX. 

Coordination and Incoordination . 

. 99 

X. 

Relaxation 

. 124 

XI. 

Weight-Transfer 

. 134 

XII. 

Vertical Arm-Movement 

. 149 

XIII. 

Lateral Arm-Movement. 

. 160 


FART m 



THE TOUCH-PORMS OP PIANO TECHNIQUE 


XIV. 

Arm-Legato 

. 177 

XV. 

Tremolo . . . . 

. 183 

XVI. 

Staccato 

. 196 

XVII. 

Pinger-Stroke 

. 217 

XVIII. 

Scales 

. 251 

XIX. 

Arpeggio 

. 262 

XX. 

Miscellaneous Movements .... 

. 277 

XXL 

Individual Differences : General 

. 297 

XXII. 

Individual Differences : The BIand 

. 311 

XXIII. 

Tone-Qualities 

. 337 

XXIV. 

Style 

. 362 


RbsumI; 

. 376 


Bibliography 

. 379 


Index 

. 387 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


1. Types of Levers 

. 'page 

5 

2. Angles of Muscular Pull .... 

- • ? j 

7 

3. Parallelogram of Forces .... 

. . 

9 

4. Composition of Co-planar Forces 

. 

9 

5. Parallelepiped of Forces .... 

• * ?s 

10 

6. Parallel Forces 

• • JJ 

11 

7. Positions of Eadius and Ulna (Plate I) 

facing page 

16 

8. Trunk Eelaxation 

. page 

20 

9. Stonlder Eotation 

• • ?? 

20 

10. Elbow Flexion 

• • r j 

21 

11. Fore-arm Eotation .... 

• • 

22 

12, Wrist Flexion 

. . ,, 

23 

13. Finger Flexion 

• • 

24 

14. Horizontal Movements .... 


26 

15. Horizontal Movements at Elbow-joint 

• • n 

27 

16. Hand-positions (Plate I) ... 

17. Muscles of the Chest, Shoulder, and Upper- 

facing page 

16 

arm (Plate II) .... 

•' ?» 

40 

18. Deep Muscles of the Fore-arm (Plate III) 

>) 

42 

Superficial Muscles of the Fore-arm (Plate IV) 

»» 

43 

Muscles of the Hand (Plate V) 


44 

19. Diagram of Muscular Tonus . 

. page 

61 

20. Conical Movement of Humerus 

, . 

75 

21. Action of Finger-movement on Hand 

• • ? > 

84 

22. Action of Finger-movement on Wrist 

. . 

83 

23. Action of Finger-movement on Elbow 


85 

24. Action of Finger-movement on Hand 

• • *1 

86 

25. The Dorsal Interrossei Muscles 

• • 

88 

26. Location of Hand Muscles 

• • 

88 

27. Effect of Finger-stroke on Adjoining Finger 

28. Method for Third-finger Control during 

. . . } 

88 

Stroke of Second Finger (Plate VI) . 

29. Instrument for Eecording Contractions of 

facing page 

88 

Finger-extensors (Plate VII) 

j> >» 

92 

30. Active and Passive Movements 

31. Difference in Muscular Contraction in 

Passive and Active Finger-lift 

page 

93 

(Plate VII) ..... 

facing page 

92 

32. Diagram of Ballistic Movement 

33. Types of Muscular Contraction with 

, page 

104 

Variations in Speed .... 

* • 

107 


VI 



LIST 01* ILLUSTEATIOHS 


KKi. 

34. Two T>"pes of Action of the Peetoralis Major . . page 

35. Time Relationship between Muscular 

Contraction and Key-movement . , • „ 

5? >j jj a • • 

37. Time Relationship of Muscular Contrac- 

tion in Finger-stroke ,, 

38. Initial Muscular Contraction and End of 

Finger-stroke 

39. Example of Arm-writing ,, 

40. Time Relationship between Muscular 

Contraction and Key-movement . . . „ 

41 

>J 5J >J >> • * JJ 

42. Mechanical Arm (Plate VIII) . . . facing page 

43. Diagrams of Arm-positions page 

44. Weight-transfer in Trill 

45. Weight-transfer and Intensity 

46. Weight-transfer and Speed 

47. Coordination in Finger-movement . 

48. Weight-transfer in Finger-repetition 

49. Weight-transfer in Finger-sequence . 

50. Weight-transfer in Finger-repetition 

51. Weight-transfer in Scales 

62, Effect of Percussiveness on Weight-transfer . . „ 

53. Types of Arm-stroke 

54. Effect of Percussiveness on Arm-drop . • »> 

55. Incoordination in Arm-movement 

56. Mechanical Construction of Lateral Arm-transfer . „ 

57. Lateral Arm-movement 

58. The Pantograph Method for Recording 

Lateral Arm-transfer (Plate IX) . facing page 

59. Repeated Octave Leaps (Plate IX) . . » 

60. Asymmetry of Lateral Arm-transfer . . page 

61. Pantograph Record of Mixed Figures in 

Lateral Arm-movement (Plate IX) . facing page 

62. Effect of Intensity on Lateral Arm- 

movement (Plate X) . . . „ 

63. Effect of Intensity on Lateral Arm- 

movement (Plate XI) ... „ » 

64. Effect of Intensity on Height of Curve 

(Plate XI) n 

65. Effect of Speed on Lateral Arm-transfer . . . fog^ 

66. Effect of Tempo on the Form of Lateral 

Arm-transfer (Plate XII) . . . facing page 

67. Pantograph Records of Lateral Arm- 

transfer (Plate XIII) . . :5 

68. Effect of Crescendo and Ritard on Lateral 

Arm-transfer (Plate XIII) . . „ „ 


vii 


109 

no 

no 

111 

111 

119 

121 

121 

124 

129 

136 

137 

139 

140 

141 

142 

143 

144 

145 
153 
155 
157 
161 

163 

164 

164 

165 

164 

166 


168 

168 

169 

169 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


viii 

FIG. 

69. Effect of Crescendo on Lateral Arm- 

transfer (Plate XIII) . . . facivtg j>age 169 

70. Hand-movement in Mixed Figure 

(Plate XIV) M 170 

71. Hand-movement in Crescendo (Plate XIV) „ „ 170 

72. Notation of Crescendo in Octave Passage . . . page 171 

73. Displacement of Curve tlirougli Accent 

(Plate XIV) . . . . . famngpage 170 

74. Force Action in Key-release page 173 

75. Muscular Contraction in Arm-movement ..... 174 

76. Force Action in Key-release 174 

77. Wrist-movement in 179 

78. Wrist-movement in Armrl^ato ....,, 180 

79. Wrist-movement in Key-release . . . . „ 182 

80. Weight-transfer in Tremolo 184 

81. Diagram of Fore-arm Rotation in Tremoio . . „ 186 

82. Photograph of Diatonic Octave Tremolo 

Showing Fore-arm Rotation (Plate XV) facing page 186 

83. Curve of Finger-action in Fore-arm 

Rotation in Tremolo (Plate XV) . ,, „ 186 

84. Tremolo Figure Showing Need for Finger- 

movement ....... page 189 

85. Types of Tremolo Figures 190 

86. Effect of Crescendo on Diatonic Octave 

Tremolo (Plate XV) . . . facing page 186 

87. Effect of Extreme Tones on Tremolo Accents . . page 193 

88. Effect of Extreme Tones on Tremolo Accents . . „ 195 

89. Independence of Key-ascent and Finger-ascent . . „ 197 

90. Wrist-movement in Hawd-sfoccato 198 

91. Wrist-jerk and Key-impact 199 

92. Wrist-movement and Key-pressure . , . ... 200 

93. Hand and Fore-arm Muscles in 201 

94. Hand-position Useful in Teaching Hand- 

staccato (Plate XVI) . . . facing page 202 

95. Effect of Keyboard Range on Fore-arm Rotation . page 204 

96. Types of Tapping 206 

97. Muscular Action in . . , . 208 

98. Muscular Action in /Stoccato 208 

99. Arm Mass in Vibrato Fixation . . . . 210 

100. Simultaneous Contraction of Antagonists in Vibrato . 211 

101. Tetanic Character of Muscular Contraction in ,, 212 

102. Tetanic Character of Finger-staccato 215 

103. Angles of Muscular Pull in Hand 218 

104. Types of Finger-stroke 220 

105. Flat and Curved Fingers 221 

106. Added Contraction Required in Curved Fingers . 222 

107. Volar Flexor Contraction in Full Arm-drop , . 224 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


ix 

FIG. 

108. EfEect of Nail-joint Position on Key-depression . page 226 

109. EjSect of Finger-position on Key-resistance ... „ 227 

110. Method of Recording Key-movements and 

Finger-movements (Plate XVII) . facing page 230 

111. Diagram of Types of Finger-movement . . . page 231 

112. Types of Finger-stroke • „ 232 

113. Effect of Percussiveness on Finger-stroke . . . „ 234 

114*. Effect of Intensity on Finger-stroke . . . „ 235 

115. Effect of Finger-stroke on Arm-movement . . „ 238 

116. Effect of Finger-stroke on Adjoining Finger „ 238 

117. Effect of Playing-unit on Finger-stroke . . . „ 240 

118. Relationship between Key-movement and 

Finger-stroke „ 241 

119. Effects of Relaxation and Rigidity on Finger-stroke. „ 242 

120. Effect of Finger-stroke on Tone-quality . . . „ 244 

121. Effect of Finger-stroke on Tone-quality . . . „ 245 

122. Effect of Finger-stroke on Tone-quality . . . „ 245 

123. Effect of Tempo on Finger-stroke . . . . „ 248 

124. Movement of Third Finger in Ascending 

and Descending Scale (Plate XVIII) . famig page 252 

125. Thumb-movement in Rapid Scale 

(Plate XVIII) .... „ „ 252 

126. Preparation of Finger-movement in Scale 

(Plate XVIII) .... „ 252 

127. Hand-movement in Ascending Scale 

(Plate XIX) ..... „ „ 256 

128. Hand-movement in Descending Scale 

(Plate XIX) „ „ 256 

129. Hand-movement in Rapid Ascending and 

Descending Scale (Plate XX) . . 257 

130. Thumb-movement in Ascending Scale 

(Plate XX) „ „ 257 

131. Octave Diatonic Scales page 259 

132. Effect of Range on Lateral Arm-transfer 

(Plate XX) facing page 257 

133. Hand-movement in Heavy Portamento . . . page 260 

134. Effect of Tempo on Hand-movement . . • „ 260 

135. Relationship between Wrist- and Thumb- 

movement in Arpeggio 264 

136. Hand-movement in a Rapid Arpeggio 

(Plate XXI) ..... facing page 266 

137. Hand-movement in a Rapid Arpeggio 

(Plate XXI) ..... „ „ 266 

138. Hand-movement in Arpeggio without 

Passing-under the Thumb (Plate 

XXII) , „ 267 

139. Arpeggio-movoments page 269 



X 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


140. Hand-movement in Rapid Arpeggio 

(Plate XXII) . . . . . facing page 267 

141. Hand-movement in Arpeggio (Plate 

XXIII) „ „ 270 

142. Hand-movement in Arpeggio (Plate 

XXIII) „ „ 270 

143. Thumb- and Second-finger Movements in 

Arpeggio (Plate XXIV) ... „ 271 

144. Thumb- and Second-finger Movements in 

Arpeggio (Plate XXIV) ... - 271 

145. Hand-movement in Slow Arpeggio 

(Plate XXIV) . . . . „ 271 

146. Efiect of Intensity on Finger-stroke in Arpeggio . page 274 

147. Effect of Fingering upon Hand-movements 

(Plate XXV) facing page 278 

148. » „ „ „ .. 278 

149, 150, 151. Effect of Fallboard on Forward 

Arm-shift (Plate XXVI) . . . „ „ 280 

Fallboard, showing Finger-tip Contacts 

(Plate XXVII) .... „ 281 

Fallboard, showing Finger-tip Contacts 

(Enlarged Scale) (Plate XXVII) . .> 281 

152. Effect of Fingering and Arm-shift upon 

Smoothness of Movement (Plate 

XXVIII) 282 

153, 154. Incoordinated Movements (Plate 

XXIX) „ 284 

155, 156. Chromatic Octaves (Plate XXX) . ,, .. 286 

155. Incoordinated Octaves (Plate XXX) . 286 

156. Coordinated Octaves (Plate XXX) . . .. 286 

157. Incoordinated Lateral Arm-shift (Plate 

XXX) 286 

158. Arm Rotation (Plate XXXI) . . ,, 290 

159. Complexity of Arm-movement (Plate 

XXXI) „ „ 290 

160. Hand-movement in Cadenza of Chopin- 


Liszt Chant Polonaise (Plate XXXII) „ 292 

161. Hand-movement in Cadenza of Liszt’s 

Tarantella (Plate XXXIII) . 293 

162. Arm-types showing Weight-variations 

(Plate XXXIV) ... m 21^8 

163. Hand-position detemoined by Distorted Tonus . . poye 304 

164. Variations in Finger-abduction on account 

of Size of Hand 312 


165. Types of Hand-positions (Plate XXXV} . facing page 314 

166. The Physiological Natural Hand-position 

at the Keyboard (Plate XXX^’) 


314 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


XI 


FIG. 

167. Hand-types page 317 

168. Hypo-flexion of the Nail-joints (Plate 

* faoiTig page 314: 

169. Bones of the Wrist, showing Differences 

in Articulating Surfaces (Plate 

XXXVI) 322 

170. Wrist Region (Plate XXXVI) . . ’’ 322 

171. Range of Joint-articulation (Plate 

XXXVII) „ „ 324 

172. Various Types of Hyper-extension (Double- 

jointedness) (Plate XXXVII) . . » » 324 

173. Range of Movement Determined by 

Skeletal Structure in Finger-bones 

(Plate XXXVIII) . . . . facing page 325 

174. Extreme Hyper-extension in the Hand- 

knuckle of the Fifth Finger (Plate 

XXXVIII) ..... „ „ 325 

175. X-ray of the Hand-knuckles (Plate 

XXXIX) „ „ 326 

176. Hypo-flexion in Nail-joint of Index Finger 

(Plate XXXIX) . . . . j? j> 326 

177. Full Extension with Non-rounded Bone- 

ends (Plate XXXIX) ... „ „ 326 

178. Differences in Articulation between Hand- 

knuckle and Finger-joint (Plate XL) . „ „ 327 

179. Hand-skeleton (Plate XL) . . . „ „ 327 

180. Lateral View of Hand-knucMe (Plate XL) „ ,, 327 

181. Hand-skeleton. Narrow Hand, Long 

Fingers (Plate XLI) ... » „ 328 

182. Limitation of Range by Bone-formation 

(Plate XLII) „ „ 329 

183. Limitation of Abduction by Tissues (Plate 

XLII) „ „ 329 

184. Diagram of Mechanical Principle in 

Double-jointedness page 330 

185. Differences of Skeletal Resistance in 

Various Pianistic Finger-positions 

(Plate XLIII) .... facing page 332 

186. Skeletal Hand-position (Plate XLIV) . „ „ 333 

187. Muscular Hand-position (Plate XLIV) . „ „ 333 

188. Anatomical Differences in Finger-tips 

(Plate XLV) „ „ 334 

189. Diagram of Force-variations in Tone-qualities . . page 338 

190. Dynamograph for Tone-quality : Sparkling . . „ 339 

191. Muscular Contraction in Tone-quality : Sparkling . „ 339 

192. Dynamograph for Tone-quality : Velvety . . „ 340 

193. „ „ „ : Crisp . . . 341 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


xdi 

FIG. 

194. Dynamograph for Tone-quality : Bell . . . 'page 342 

195. „ and Muscular Contraction for Tone- 

quality: Dry . . . . 343 

196. „ for Tone-quality : Brittle . . . „ 344 

197. ,, and Muscular Contraction for Tone- 

quality: Singing 345 

198. „ for Tone-quality : Repressed . . „ 347 

199. „ „ „ : Surface . . „ 348 

200. Muscular Contraction in Key-movement for Tone- 

quality : Surface 349 

201 . Initial Maximal Muscular Contraction in Surface Tone , , 349 

202. Dynamograph for Tone-quality : Pearly . . . „ 350 

203. Determination of Tone-quality by Fingering . . „ 351 

204. Independence of Finger and Key-release 353 

205. „ „ „ „ . 354 

206. Illusion in Tone-production . . . 357 

207. Melodic Accentuation .... 358 

208. Exercise for Developing Melodic Accentuation 359 

209. Exercises for Developing Finger Independence 361 

210. Hand-imovements, sho'wing Individual 

Differences in playing the Same 
Passage (Plate XL VI) . '. . fadtig page 362 

21L „ „ „ „ „ ,, „ 362 

212. Diagram, showing Effect of Fallboard 

on Movement . page 363 

213. Combination of Figs. 210 and 211 

(Plate XLVII) .... facing ,, 366 

214. Example of Superior Coordination 

(Plate XLVII) .... 366 

215. Example of Inferior Coordination 

(Plate XLVII) .... 366 

216. Incoordination in a Rapid Lateral Arm- 

shift (Plate XLVII) ... „ 366 

217. Individual Differences in the Performance 

of the Same Passage (Plate XLVIII) ,, „ 367 

218. Effect of Repetition on Movement 

(Plate XLXIX) .... 368 

219. ,, ,, 368 

220. Dynamo^aph, showing Individual Variations in 

Playing the Same Passage .... page 371 

221. Example of Incoordination 372 

222. Differences in Style „ 373 

^23. „ ,, 373 



PREFACE 

‘‘ A LLE Theorie ist grau/’ This Mefistofelian rejoinder of 
the philosophic Faust typifies, quite accurately, the usual 
attitude of the musician toward a scientific investigation of his 
art. The “ whys ’’ and the wherefores ” do not concern hinn ; 
they are colourless superfiuities, gray before the beginning, and, 
unfortunately, often gray after the investigation. He still believes 
that the single piano-key can be infiuenced in other ways than 
dynamically, and that a knowledge of the action of muscles and of 
the laws of the lever are of no value in his work. That is the typical 
attitude. A few eminent and praiseworthy exceptions tend but to 
emphasize the prevalent view. 

This attitude is to be regretted. It has served to keep obscure 
a field of great theoretical interest and practical importance : the 
border-land where science meets art. True, a group of able workers 
has already made headway, not without some serious errors, in 
clearing away the obscurity : Tetzel, Steinhausen, and Breithaupt 
in Germany, Matthay in England, Jaell in France, Bmgnoli in Italy ; 
but their books, when they are found in the teacher’s library at all, 
too often still have their leaves uncut. Translations, with one or 
two exceptions, do not exist ; a rather lamentable reflection upon 
professional appreciation of really valuable original contributions 
to the field of physiological mechanics. The concert artist, if he so 
chooses, may work as he will, remaining his own problem, or, 
perhaps, finding his own solution ; but the teacher, selling lessons 
in physiological mechanics hour after hour, day after day, should 
at least know the tools with which he works. 

But, too often, he does not ; and since he constantly uses his 
arros and fingers, he usually resents the assertion that he does not 
know how they are used. He will oppose con ira the use of any 
Latin anatomical term, but he will accept, tranquillissimo, many 
Italian terms, which, when applied to the piano, have no meaning 
at all. Relaxation, contraction, weight-transfer, coordination, 
looseness, mechanical forces, and force quality are bandied about 
in terminological confusion, and when he is told that many of the 
tonal effects are imaginary, that is to say, when he is confronted 
with scientific data, he usually resorts to a condescending sneer 
or to an infuriated, albeit blind disparagement, neither of which 

xiii 



XIV 


PREEACE 

in any way refutes the original find ings or the conclusions to which 
they lead. When, in a previously published volume on the Physical 
Basis of Piano Touch and Tone, I deduced evidence of the utter 
dependability of piano tone-quality upon tonal intensity and 
duration, many of the letters and comments that reached me were 
thus delightfully logical or personally complimentary. I select 
three remarks, from many, as typical ; the pious axiom : The 
soul of the piano transcends all investigation ’’ ; the intelligent 
comment : The records may all be true, but I do not believe 

them even if they are ; and the much more colourful motive : 
“ You are crazy.” 

On the other hand, those teachers who, after a few hours’ 
perusal of an anatomy proceed to lend their writings and teaching 
a pseudo-scientific basis by injecting, subcutaneously, a 
miscellaneous dose of Latin names, likewise have helped to obscure 
the field. I know of one instance where the muscles bending the 
nail-joints are described as situated in the fingers ; another w^here 
a single muscle, the deltoid, apparently is responsible for all the 
variations of piano techmque. The human organism is not quite 
so simply arranged. Only they who have seriously sought to unravel 
some of its intricacies can adequately appreciate the structural 
complexity and the functional wonders of the machine called man. 
Among these are the scientists and those musicians who realize the 
need for a scientific determination of data and the evaluation thereof 
in terms of the pianist’s performance. 

The present investigation of physiological mechanics wus 
undertaken in order to establish, if possible, a sound physiological 
basis for the mechanics of piano technique. The experimental 
work connected with it has extended over a period of five years, 
a great part of which was given over to the necessary verification 
of data and to improvements in methods of recording. It is 
publi^ed as the second part of a general investigation of piano 
technique, of which the &st part is the Physical Basis of Piano 
Touch and Tone already mentioned, and of which the third part 
will be a study, now in course of preparation, on the psychological 
phases of the problem. The interrelation among these parts must be 
kept in mind in mterpreting the present results, because the limita- 
tions within which certain topics are here treated, are otherwise 
not commensmate with their relative importance. The present 
investigation is limited to the mechanics of muscular action, 
particularly of the movements used in piano-playing. Problems 
of coordination, in so far as they involve neural and cortical activity, 
are left untouched, or are treated fragmentarily, in order to keep the 



PREFACE 


XV 


study witliin its prescribed limits. In spite of this restriction, 
however, the line of demarcation often could not be precisely 
determined, and an occasional excursion into the interesting 
psychological field could then not be avoided. 

The study, in spite of its limitations, has a three-fold value : 
a general theoretical value, in that it seeks to arrive at the true 
status of the operation of the muscles used in piano-playing, 
resting its case with the attainment of this aim, apart from all 
other considerations ; secondly, a specific, practical value, in that 
it throws light upon concrete problems of piano technique, where 
its findings will aid piano teaching and playing ; and, lastly, a 
cumulative value, in that it forms, in connection with the physical 
phases, a necessary basis for any investigation of the psychological 
aspects of the problem. Coordination, muscular memory, practice 
methods, learning curves, and allied questions cannot be intelli- 
gently analysed without a clear knowledge of their physiological 
and mechanical substructure ; nor could the physiological phases 
have been adequately investigated without a knowledge of the 
purely physical attributes of piano touch and tone. 

The experimental method of procedure was adopted in order to 
eliminate the vagaries of the personal equation. The subjects 
making the records were instructed to play as they normally would, 
knowing nothing about the aim of the experiment. Extreme care 
was necessary here, for the subtlety with which the mind affects 
movement may readily become a source of serious error. All 
records, therefore, were checked by repetition. An additional check 
is furnished by physiological and mechanical theory, with the laws 
of which the records must agree if they are to be considered valid. 

Finally, I wish to acknowledge my sincere appreciation of the 
assistance given me through the many hours of tedious work. I am 
indebted to the late Harold Randolph and to May Evans for placing 
at my disposal an adequately equipped laboratory, to my colleagues 
at the Peabody Conservatory for their time and patience in making 
the records, and to Virginia Blackhead, Louis Cheslock, and Wilmer 
Bartholomew for assistance in the conduct of the experiments and 
in the organization of the data. To Dr. Max Kahn my thanks are 
due for the excellent Rbntgenograms and for valuable aid in their 
interpretation. Also to Messrs. Longmans Green & Co., Ltd. for 
permission to reproduce Figures 17 and 18 from Gray’s Anatomy. 


BaUmore, 

Jarymty^ 1929. 


0 . 0 . 




PAET I 

THE PHYSIOLOGICAL 


ORGANISM 




Chapter I 

Mechanical Principles 

The complex problem of physiological mechanics as applied to 
piano technique resolves itself finally, into one basic question : 
the variations of force produced at the key-surface by the player. 
The present study is concerned with the manner in which these 
force-variations are produced. 

Since the final end of all technical movements at the keyboard 
is this force-variation, the body becomes a machine, and, like all 
machines, must obey the laws of mechanical action. Action and 
reaction, equilibrium of forces, dependence of a force upon mass and 
acceleration, laws of the lever — all these apply to physiological 
motion as well as to mechanical motion in general. The fact that 
philological motion is more complex, and is under the control of 
volition, does not introduce any new principle of reaction in the 
mechanical part of movement. 

As basis of the investigation we have, first of all, certain fixed 
properties of matter which should be clearly differentiated. 

Eigidity : that property of matter as a result of which its shape 
cannot easily be changed. 

Plasticity : The opposite of rigidity. That property of matter 
which permits it to be moulded into various forms. 

Elasticity: That property of matter which causes a body to 
return to its original shape after the forces responsible 
for its change of shape have ceased to act. Kubber and steel 
are elastic ; clay and lead are inelastic. 

Compressibility: That property of matter which permits a 
diminution of volume. 

Expansibility : The opposite of compressibility. Water is non- 
compressible and non-expansible ; air is both compressible 
and expansible. 

Weight : The mass per unit volume of matter. 

Inertia : That property of matter by virtue of which a body 
tends to remain in a fixed state, whether of rest or of motion, 
until acted upon by external forces. 

As further basis we have certain proved laws of mechanical 
action. The form in which they are here stated was selected with 
a view toward their relationship to the problems of piano-technique. 

3 



4 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

1. A body at rest remains at rest unless acted upon by some 
external force. 

2. A cbange in speed or in direction of motion of a body 
results from the action of a second force, the first force producing 
the original motion. 

3. The total effect of a force depends upon three things : 
its numerical value, its direction, and its point of application. 

4. The action of forces need not always produce motion. 
Two forces, equal and opposite, neutralize each other and do not 
produce morion. 

5. The speed and direction of a body, unless the component 
forces be known, is not in itself an index of the forces acting 
upon the body. A force of 5 in the absence of all other forces 
will produce the same motion in a given body as a force of 10 
opposed by a force of 5, other things equal. 

6. The numerical value of a force depends upon the mass 
and the speed of the body producing it. 

7. A force always produces motion in the exact line of its 
action, unless otherwise interfered with. 

8. The force of gravity influences all motion. It acts 
vertically downward. Its value and direction are constant, 
the former for any given locality, the latter for all localities. 

9. Motion that takes place along a straight line is called 
r eotiiliuear motio n ; along a curved line, curvilinear jorntion. 
When a body turns upon any axis, real or theoretical, motioh 
of rotation results. When a body as a whole changes its spatial 
relationship to surrounding bodies, motion of tra^lation results. 
Both types of motion may be present at the same time,~ m equal 
or in unequal degrees. 

10. A force whose effect is the combined effects of several 
other forces is called their resultant. The forces producing 
this resultant are called the components. 

11. The mutual reactions of two bodies on each other are 
always forces equal in amount and opposite in direction. 

Of the various types of mechanical work {lever, inclined plane, 
screw, wedge, wheel) we shall be primarily concerned with the 
lever. 

Any rigid body capable of rotation about a fixed point or axis 
is a lever. The most useful form of the lever is a straight rod, 
in which the point or axis of rotation is called the fulcrum and the 
extent of rod on either side of the fulcrum is called the lever 
arm. Levers are divided into three classes. 



MECHAMCM. PEINCIPLES 


5 


Class 1. — Eulcrmn between tbe force and resistance. In this 
class the force acts on one side of the fulcrum and the resistance 
to be overcome or the weight to be moved is on the other side of 
the fulcrum. The crow-bar, scissors, and the see-saw are examples. 
The characteristic feature of this class of levers is the change in 
direction between the line of force-application and that of resistance- 
motion. These motions (in the straight-rod lever) are opposite 
in direction. (Fig. la.) 

Class 2. — ^Resistance between fulcrum and force. Here the 
fulcrum is at one end of the rod, the weight to be moved some- 
where along the rod, and the force at some point between^the weight 




3 



Fro. 1. 

and the free end (not fulcrum end) of the rod. The wheelbarrow 
and the nutcracker are examples. The resistance is moved in the 
same direction in which the force acts. (Fig. lb.) 

Class 3. — ^Force between ■ fulcrum and resistance. Similar to 
ruaga 2, except that force and resistance have changed places. 
The draw-bridge is an example. Direction of force and the 
movement of 4ie resistance are the same. (Fig. Ic.) 

The usefulness of the various types of lever is determined by 
the purpose which their application is to serve. The work-coefficient 
of all levers (ignoring friction) is the ratio of power-arm to resist- 
ance-arm. That is equivalent to saying that, since the work 



6 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 

done depends upon the weight moved and the distance through 
which it moves, the greater the distance, the less the weight ; 
and, conversely, the greater the weight, the less will be the dis- 
tance through which a given force will move it. The effect of 
this principle upon the three ty^pes of lever is shown in Fig. 1, a, 6, c. 

For class 1 levers this principle holds in any desired degree. 
By Tnaln'iig F P long and F K short, a wide excursion of p to p' 
wiU result in a small excursion of It to R\ but will enable P to lift 
a very considerable weight. Thejbransfer is fmg^speed to p owe r. 
If FP be short and FR long, a slight 3TspScement of P will cause 
a wide displacement of E, but with a corresponding loss of, power. 
TysJ[s,_a.jfeajisfe^of^^ . ' i 

The remaining classes of levers, oh the other hand, are clearly 
differentiated in the mechanical purposes they serve. Since in 
Class II, E must always be between F and P, the power necessarily 
moves a greater distance than the resistance. Hence the use of such 
a lever always results in a gain in power with a loss in speed. In 
Class III the power always ir between tEeTuIcrr^ and the resist- 
ance. It must move through a distance less than the E. 
(p'p < r'y.) As a result we have always a gam in speed with a 

If speed in levers of the second class be desired, the necessarily 
wide excursion and excessive speed of the force-application would 
make the movement awkward. On the other hand, greater power 
can be secured with the third-class levers by appropriately increasing 
the power at P, which would not interfere with the practicability of 
the movement. 

Points of application ; One determinant of the value of a force 
is its point of application. By varying the ratio between 
the lengths of the lever arms (F E and F P) in any lever, 
the ratio between the force expended and the resistance 
overcome will be changed. In levers of the second and 
third classes, however, this change can never overcome their 
fundamental differences of function as to speed and force. 
The longer the power-arm, the more resistance can be over- 
come ; the longer the resistance-arm, the more power will 
be required to move it. 

Direction of force : A further determinant of the value of a force 
is its Ime or direction of application. It is greatest in poorer 
when the line of action is at right angles to the lever-arm, 
it di mini shes in power as the angle of force-incidence 
decreases. When the angle reaches zero, the power-effect 
of the force upon lever-movement is zero alst>. That is 



MECHAMCAL PEINCIPLES 7 

to say, wheii tte line of action is parallel to the lever-arm, 
the force cannot act against the resistance to be overcome. 
The speed effect of a force is just the reverse of this : it 
is least when the force acts at right angles to the lever-arm 
and increases as the right angle of force-incidence decreases. 
These differences are shown in Fig. 2 for a third-class 
lever. 

Rv 



Direction 1 = greatest force, least speed ; direction 6 = least 
force, greatest speed. PP'= distance through which power 
acts. R R' R"' distance through which weight is moved. Since 
P P' is the same for all directions, the difference in length between 
R E' and R R" shows the change in speed resulting from a change 
in direction of force. (P P' may be assumed to be the distance 
through which a muscle shortens during a contraction.) 

If a force the magnitude of which is represented by P P' 
acts in direction 1, it will move R F into the position E' F and the 
resistance R will move through R R' . If the same distance 
P P' be applied in direction 6, in order to move P in direction 
5 to P', R F will have to move into position R" F, because PF == mF, 
and m n is vertical. If, now, the distance P P' be considered 
a shortening of the muscular tendon, equal amounts of contraction 
will produce the widely different displacements R R' and R R". 
Thejmgie.jat^ w3i ich .^^ to- determme 

the work which a givm contraction willrdo. 

Combinations of these power, point, and direction relationships 
can produce any gradation of force-effects. If, to the maximum 
power-point position (levers of jfirst and second classes), is added 
maximum direction-position (right angles to lever-arm), we get 
a lever producing the greatest amount of work when measured 



8 PHYSIOLOGICAL OBGANISM 

by tbe resistance tbat it overcomes. And if, on the other hand, 
to the speed-position (lever of the third class) is added 

the maximnm direction-position (6 in Fig. 2), we get a lever 
giving the greatest speed. Between these extremes ail grades 
of intermediacy are found. A force acting at a relatively unfavor- 
able point in the lever-arm may overcome this disadvantage by 
acting in a proper direction. Or a force too weak to do the necessary 
work at one point, may be successfully used if it can be made to act 
at a more favorable point in the lever-arm. Equal end-eiffects 
may thus be attained in many ways by varying the relationships 
existing among the direction, the point of application, and the 
numerical value of the force. 

The material point submitted to the action of a force is called 
the pomt of application of the force. The direction taken by the 
point as a result of this force-action, and considered independently 
of the action of other forces, acting simultaneously, is called the 
direction of the force. 

The intensity of a force is measured by the velocity which it 
imparts to a given mass in a given unit of time. The greater the 
force, the greater the velocity. 

A body at rest may be free from the action of forces or it may be 
acted upon by equal but opposite forces. 

Two forces equal in intensity and opposite in their directions 
cannot produce motion. The forces, themselves, are not destroyed ; 
their external effects are neutralized. 

Forces may be graphically represented by lines : the length of 
line corresponds to the intensity of the force and the direction of 
the line, to the direction of the force. 

When a material point or system of points is acted upon simul- 
taneously by more than one force, the movement imparted to it 
will be the algebraic sum of all the forces and their directions. This 
movement is called the Eesultant ; and it can be produced by 
a single force of appropriate intensity acting in an appropriate 
direction. 

Thus if a force of 4 acts on a body in one direction and a force 
of 2 acts upon it at the same time in an opposite direction, the body 
will move in the direction of the greater force at a velocity of 4 - *2 
or 2. The same motion' will resxdt from a single force of 2 acting 
in the given direction. The separate forces acting in producing a 
resultant are called its Components. 

Parallelogram of Forces . — ^If a material point is acted upon by 
two forces represented by straight lines, both in magnitude and 



MECHAMCAL PRINCIPLES 9 

direction, tlie resultant will be exactly* represented by the diagonal 
of the parallelogram of which the two lines are sides. 




Fio. 4 . 



10 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

Let A B aad A C be tbe two forces, acting upon point A. Their 
combined action will be represented in direction hy the direction 
of the diagonal A D, and in intensity by the len^h of this diagonal. 

Composition of Co-planar Forces, — ^The principle of the parallelo- 
gram of forces may be applied to the composition of any number 
of co-pIanar forces, by taking each two forces in turn and finding 
their resultant, which is then combined with one of the remaining 
forces to find a further partial resultant. When the last partial 
resultant has been combined on the parallelogram principle with 
the last single force, the resulting diagonal will be the total 
resultant of all the forces. 

Let A be a point acted upon by four forces in one plane, their 
magnitudes and directions being represented by the lines AB, AC, 
AD, and AE respectively. The partial resultant of the forces 
A B and A C will be A m ; that of the forces A n and A D will be 
A o\ and finally that of the forces A o and A E will be A E. The 
total result of the action of the four original forces A B, A C, A D, 
and AE is therefore represented by a force of the magnitude 
and direction of A F. And a single force of this magnitude and 
direction acting upon A would produce exactly the same effect 
upon A as the combined action of the four given forces. 

ParaUehpiped of Forces, — When three forces acting upon a point 
are not co-planar, the resultant is the diagonal of the parallelepiped 
of which the forces are sides. Similar results are obtained for any 
number of forces. 



Fig. r>. 

Let A B, AC, and A D be forces acting upon A. Their total 
resultant is A r. 

Parallel Forces, — When two parallel forces are applied at the 
extremities of a straight line, they have a resultant equal to their 
sum and acting at a point which divides the straight line into parts 
inversely proportional to the forces. 



MECHANICAL PEINCIPLES 11 

Let A D and B E be two parallel forces acting upon the line 
A B. Their resultant will be represented in direction and magnitude 
byCE. AC:BE::BC: AD. 



When the two forces are parallel but opposite in direction, their 
resultant will still be parallel to the components, but its magnitude 
will be equal to the difference of the components instead of their 
sum ; and the force wiU still act at a point in the straight line 
dividing the line into segments inversely proportional to the forces. 

Composition of Parallel Forces , — ^The resultant of more than two 
parallel forces is compounded in a manner similar to the composition 
of non-parallel forces. Two forces are taken in turn and then 
resultant is then combined with one of the remaining forces. 

The Couple . — A system of forces equal in magnitude and opposite 
in direction, acting at two points, not in the Ime of force, is called 
a couple and tends to produce rotation, in place of translation. 
Therefore, when a body possesses both translation and rotation we 
may assume the translation to be produced by a force and 
the rotation by a couple. The perpendicular distance between the 
lines of action of the two equal forces is called the arm of the couple. 
The product of one of the two equal forces and the arm is called 
the moment of the couple and is the measure of the power of the 
couple to produce rotation. 

Resolution of Forces , — ^As any number of forces can be com- 
pounded into a single force, so a given force can likewise be resolved 
into two or any number of forces which would produce the same 
effect. 



12 


PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 


These mechanical principles thus stated, seem to have nothing 
to do with piano-playing. Yet when we recall that they operate 
in precisely the same mechanical manner from the playing of a 
simple finger exercise to that of a Beethoven sonata, we can 
appreciate them as the foundation for any investigation of piano 
technique. Consequently, they will be referred to frequently in 
the ]ater analyses of physiological movement. 

A few concrete instances will show this application : — 

The principle of the lever points out the fallacy of locating the 
muscles that move a part in the part moved : finger muscles in 
the fingers, muscles that move the hand, in the hand, and so on. 
This is mechanically impossible. 

The direction relationships explain the great speed obtained in 
arm, hand, and finger movements with relatively little muscular 
contraction, since most muscles are levers of the third class, acting 
in the maximum speed-direction (5, Fig. 2). 

The composition of forces shows why the visual aspect of 
movement is not a safe guide to the muscular causes of the move- 
ment, since this may result from a few or many components. 

The couple gives us a mechanical basis for the important fore-arm 
rotation touch. 

These points and their manifold ramifications are taken up in 
detail in the subsequent chapters on Touch-forms. 



CHAPTER n 


The Skeleton 

^he Physiological Organism . — The human body is a highly 
integrated organism. A method, therefore, of disintegrated 
^presentation is not without its palpable drawbacks. Chief among 
them is the premature drawing of inferences from the description 
hi any separate part. Generalizations, or the application of a 
description of structure or function of any part to the movements 
bf the body as a whole, must be postponed until the physiological 
mechanism has been studied in its entirety, for each part depends 
for its adequate practical use, to a great or small extent upon every 
other part. 

The human body may conveniently be divided into four parts : 
the skeleton, the muscles, the nerves, and the circulation. The 
following description of each part is restricted to the presentation 
of material that has a bearing upon piano technique. This limita- 
tion and the resulting conciseness may occasionally give an 
erroneous impression of the simplicity or complexity of the total 
structure ; the general conclusions, however, will hold in any case. 

Skeletal Structuee 

The skeleton is the bony and cartilagenous structure that supports 
the fleshy parts of the body. It divides into two parts, the axial 
skeleton and the appendicular skeleton. The former embraces 
the skull, the spinal column, the breastbone, the ribs, and the 
hyoid bone ; the latter embraces the bones of the upper and lower 
limbs. In piano-playing, as we shall see, the entice skeleton is 
used (pianos have been built to be played in a standing or even 
in a walking position so as to secure the greatest freedom) ; but, 
for the sake of clearness and brevity, only the bones and joints 
of the upper extremities will be considered in detail. 

Not an inconsiderable part of piano pedagogy is concerned with 
the restriction of movements to certain joints, and on the other 
hand with the relaxation of joints, so that movement may be free. 
This restriction and freedom are directly dependent upon the 
anatomical possibilities of movement at the various joints, so 
that the following analysis of these possibilities, instead of having 

13 



14 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 

mere theoretical interest, forms the basis upon which the analysis 
of the various touch-types of piano technique, described later, 
is built. A careful study of these movements will prevent much 
confusion as to what actually takes place muscularly when we play 
upon a piano, for without the skeletal structure, posture of any 
kind is impossible, and the skeleton, accordingly, is the true basis 
of all pianistic “ positions 

The Joint 

A joint is the point at which two bones connect. Certain im- 
movable joints, such as those in the skull, do not concern us here, 
since joints are of value to the piano teacher solely as potentialities 
for movement. 

In any joint the essential feature is a sliding of one surface over 
another. Any such form of motion produces considerable friction. 
In healthy joints this is reduced by the interposition of two 
membranes, called synovial membranes (one for each articulating 
surface), between the bony surfaces, and by the constant moistening 
of these membranes by an albumen-like substance : the sjmovial 
fluid. This acts as a lubricant, and permits an easy, noiseless 
sliding of the two articulating surfaces. 

J oined to the sides of the two bones, near their ends, and extending 
from one bone-head to the other, are ligaments, consisting of 
connective tissue. These ligaments, although they are plastic, 
so that they do not interfere with the movements at the joint, 
are, nevertheless, strong and inelastic. Strength and inelasticity 
are necessary if the ligaments are to fulfill their physiological 
function, which is the holding of the ends of the bones within the 
articulating cavity. If this normal range of movement be exceeded 
by tearing the ligaments, a dislocation of the joint may follow. 

Since these inelastic ligaments must permit considerable natural 
movement at the joint, they cannot also serve to hold the bones 
in place during the range of natural movement. In these positions 
they surround the joint loosely, and only function actively when 
the movement reaches its physiological limit, at which position 
one of the ligaments (on the extended side) is fully stretched, and 
thus, being inextensible, makes further movement impossible, 
unless the ligament is torn (as, in a sprain ”). The function of 
holding the ends of the bones firmly together falls to the muscles 
controlling movement at the joint, and, more indirectly, to fat 
and fleshy parts of the body surrounding the joint. Atmospheric 
pressure probably also aids somewhat. 

The particular action of the muscles is discussed in the chapter 



THE SKELETON 15 

on Muscles and Muscular Action. For tlie present it will suffice to 
point out their use merely as “ stabilizers ” of the joint. The latter 
is always surrounded by at least two sets of muscles, the one 
performing movement in a direction opposite to that of the other. 
In normal condition every muscle exerts a certain constant degree 
of pull, and this simultaneous pull on both sides of the joint presses 
one bone surface more or less fiiimly upon the other, ma.THTig possible 
an immediate response to a nerve stimulus. 

This analysis of joint-structure will form the basis for the later 
evaluation of the exercises devised by piano teachers for “ loosening 
the joints ”, imny of which are not only useless, but actually 
injurious. In joint-structure we have the key to the effect of the 
stretch exercises, choice of fingering and, to some extent, control 
of tone. 

The Elbow-Joint . — The Elbow-joint is a typical hinge-joint 
permitting movements of bending (flexion) and straightening 
(extension) arormd a single, approximately transverse, axis. Three 
bones enter into its formation, the large bone (humerus) of the 
upper arm and the two smaller bones (radius and ulna) of the fore- 
arm. Contrary to popular belief, no other movements than flexion 
and extension are possible at lie elbow-joint. The pianisticaUy 
important fore-arm rotation is not an elbow-joint movement. 

Flexion at the elbow-joint, in which movement the hand is broi^ht 
toward the shoulder or body, is usually limit ed by the contact 
of the fleshy parts of the inner (ventral) arm-surfaces at the elbow ; 
whereas extension is limited by the restraining effects of the 
ligaments and the muscles. The elbow-joint normally moves 
between 180° and 30° or 40°, from a position in which the whole 
arm is straight to the position of greatest bend at the elbow, with 
a consequent range of 140° or 150°. Movement at the elbow- 
joint permits movement of the hand in a one-dimensional plane 
only, with the elbow as its centre, and a central angle of 140° or 
150.° Not until combined with movement in other joints, for 
. example, in the shoulder, can this plane be shifted to any angle. 
In piano-playing most elbow movements are thus combined, and 
what is usually considered elbow movement entirely, involves 
other joints also. 

The Badio-Ulnar Joint . — ^This is the articulation formed by the 
two bones of the fore-arm. The upper radio-ulnar joint (situated 
in the region of the elbow — but distinct from the elbow-joint), 
is a modified ball-and-socket joint which permits a turning of the 
fore-arm and hand palm-upward (supination) and pahn-down- 
ward (pronation). This effect is produced by turning the radius 



16 


PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 


(tie siorter of tie two bones of tie fore-arm) upon its longitudinal 
axis. Wien tie arm iangs at tie side of tie body witi the thumb of 
tie hand forward (or palm upward when tie fore-arm is horizontal), 
tie two bones lie side by side, (Fig. 7&). In pronation, for example, 
when tie hand is held in the normal hand-position of piano 
technique (Fig. 7a), tie radius crosses diagonally over tie ulna. 
Tie latter cannot rotate, and serves, witi its connection to tie 
large bone of tie upper arm, to give tie whole arm its continuity. 
Without tie radio-ulnar joint, fore-arm rotation, upon which 
the important pianistic motions used in tremolo figures depend, 
would not be possible witi. any amount of freedom. Rotation 
could then come only from tie shoulder ; and it is this shoulder- 
rotation, and not tie fore-arm rotation, that explains tie apparent 
rotary movement of tie uixa in a direction opposite to that of 
tie radius. 

Tie axis of fore-arm rotation extends through tie head of tie 
ulna in a line witi tie fourth finger of tie extended hand, not tie 
third finger. Fore-arm rotation normally takes place through 
an arc varying from 150° to 170°. Rotation beyond these limits 
results from tie added 90° humerus-rotation at tie shoulder- 
joint. Complete fore-arm rotation, therefore, if we include tie 
coordination witi tie shoulder, can be extended through 2g0° 
or nearly three-fourths of a complete rotation. 

Fore-arm rotation has an important effect upon tie finger- 
movements used in piano-playing. Tie fingers, as appendages of 
tie hand, can thus, without movement at their own joints, be made 
to descend and to ascend. Since tie axis of rotation passes through 
tie fourth finger, tie thumb will describe the greatest arc because 
it is furthest removed from tie axis of rotation, and tie fifth finger, 
tie smallest arc. Tie principle is illustrated in Fig. 11, and 
later, where tremolo movement is analysed. Movements used 
to shift this axis to tie middle finger or other fingers are 
described under tie wrist-joint. 

Tie limit of pronation is set by tie actual contact of the soft 
parts and the bones, and supination by tie biceps muscle, tie most 
powerful of tie supinators. If tie upper arm be permitted to hang 
freely vertically from tie shoulder, and then tie elbow be flexed 
to a right angle (tie normal position for the pianist is this horizontal 
fore-arm), tie hand will stand in a vertical, not horizontal position 
(an inheritance of tie tree-climbing ability of our ancestors). 
From an anatomical standpoint, supination from a vertical hand 
is tie equivalent of pronation from a horizontal hand. That is 
to say, a horizontal position of the hand, tie extreme position 



Plate I 




Fig. 7. The Foie-arm, showing positions of ladius and ulna 
in pronation (a) and supination (b). 




Fig. 16. Hand positions, showing differences in joint-curvature. 
fSee o. ^2.") 




THE SKELETON 17 

in sujpination (palm np), is the anatomical equivalent of a vertical 
position of the hand, the extreme position in pronation (fifth 
finger up, thumb down). A piano keyboard, in order to keep 
this equivalency would have to be built vertically, and a horizontal 
keyboard, therefore, makes very xmequal demands upon the player 
in regard to ease and range of fore-arm pronation and supination. 
This difference, and also the direction of the axis of rotation, 
as we shall see, affects the piano tremolo in a very decisive way, 
making the pivoting on the fifth finger much easier and freer than 
that on the thumb. 

The Wrist-Joint . — ^The wrist is an example of a condyloid-joint, 
a double hinge-joint having movement about two axes, one trans- 
verse and the other front-back (antero-posterior). The former 
permits movement in a plane at right angles to the transverse 
plane of the fore-arm (bending the hand backward), and the latter 
limited movement in the plane of the fore-arm. The wrist itself 
has no movement of rotation, this being the function of the radio- 
ulnar joint. Flexion and extension at the wrist (illustrated by the 
normal hand-staccato of the pianist) may occur through an arc 
of 150° or more, with marked individual variation; whereas, 
abduction and adduction of the hand, a sidewise bending at the 
wTist (used in arpeggiated chord-figures, polyphonic, and double- 
note passages) through 60° or 70°. This lateral movement is greater 
on the outer side (toward the fifth finger) than on the inner side 
(toward the thumb) ; this difference being caused, among other 
things, by the shorter ending of the ulna, the smaller of the two 
fore-arm bones, when compared to the radius, and by the position 
of the ligaments. A combination of the movements mentioned, 
results in the circular movement of circumduction, the range of which 
is determined by the length of the extended hand. Wide individual 
differences, which have a distinct bearing on piano technique, 
occur in the movements at the wrist joint. They are treated in 
a later chapter. 

Hivnd-Joints . — ^The thumb has three joints, not only two; of 
which the first, the articulation with one of the bones of the middle 
hand (trapezium or greater multangular, so called from its size and 
shape) is the most important. This joint, located close to the wrist, 
differs radically from the equivalent joints of the other fingers. 
(See the Figures in the chapter on The Hand.) About an approxi- 
mately transverse axis flexion and extension take place, as in lifting 
and dropping the thumb in the simple thumb-stroke on the piano ; 
around an antero-posterior axis abduction and adduction occur, 
illustrated by the passing-under of the thumb in the scale and the 



18 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

arpeggio. Movements combining these axes result in considerable 
circidar movement (circumduction), and, finally, a slight rotation 
around the longitudinal axis of the thumb is also possible. It is 
this first joint, technically called carpo-metacarpal joint, that 
is chiefly involved in the thumb movements of piano technique. 
The joint is near the mist and its articulation may be seen by 
touc hing the base of the little finger with the tip of the thumb of 
the same hand. 

The chief biological function of the thumb movement, a function 
which piano pedagogy cannot disregard, is that of opposition to 
the other fingers. This constitutes the “grasping reflex”, the 
fundamentality of which is shown by its early appearance in the 
infant. By means of it an infant only a few weeks old can support 
its entire body while hanging by one hand. Pianistically this co- 
ordination, in its entirety, is of httle value, but a considerable part 
of the difficulties of learning the proper keyboard movements of 
the thumb is accounted for by the persistence of this deep-rooted 
reflex. 

The second thumb-joint (metacarpo-phalangeal) is a pure hinge- 
joint, a uniaxial joint acting about a transverse axis, with flexion 
and the reciprocal extension possible through 50° or 55°. Other 
movements at this joint are impossible in the normal hand. But 
the pathological condition popularly known as “ double-jointed- 
ness ” is frequently seen in this joint, as a result of which hyper- 
extension, a bendmg-back of the thumb through a considerable 
angle, is possible. 

The third thumb-joint (interphalangeal or nail-joint) is a pure 
hinge-joint actiog about a transverse axis and permitting volar 
flexion and the corresponding extension through 90°. Both thumb 
joints assist the first in passing the thumb-tip under the hand as 
far as possible, as in scale or arpeggio playing. 

Finger- Joints , — ^Each finger has three joints: hand-knuckle 
(metacarpo-phalangeal), mid-joint, and nail-joint (both inter- 
phalangeal). The hand-knuckles are modified ball-and-socket 
joints with the lower (volar) spherical articular surface wider than 
the. upper (dorsal) articular surface. Accordingly, movement is 
essentially directed downward and inward, toward the palm and 
normally not beyond a straight angle in the opposite direction. 
Flexion is the active movement and extension is the passive, the 
releasing movement, a physiological distinction that is of great 
importance in teaching ftager-stroke. Limited circumduction, 
a property of all ball-and-socket joints, is possible at the hand- 
knuckies. A slight lateral flexion permitting the “hollowing 



THE SKELETON* 19 

of the hand ” is also possible, being greatest for the fourth and fifth 
fingers. Flexion at the hand-knuckles normally takes place through a 
maximum arc of 90*^, extending from a straight-angle to a right-angle. 

In addition to these movements, the hand-knuckles permit 
limited sidewise motion (abduction and adduction), movements that 
are referred to the middle line of the Land. They are used pianistic- 
ally m playing chords in spread-position. On account of the 
difference between the volar and dorsal articular surfaces, however, 
abduction and adduction are possible only when the fingers are 
expended at the hand-knuckles. One cannot bend the fingers 
in the hand-knuckles w^hile the fingers are widely spread, a fact 
that must be considered when demanding hand-arch in extended 
chord positions. As flexion increases at these joints, ab- and adduc- 
tion become increasingly difficult, until at right-angle flexion, 
they are impossible. This inter-relationship illustrates the impossi- 
bility of executing widely spread chords on the piano, with an arched 
hand. The wider the spread the flatter must the hand be, a condition 
determined not so much by actual distance, as by the anatomical 
construction just described. 

The mid-joints and the terminal, distal or nail-joints (both 
known as interphalangeal joints) are pure hinge-joints permitting 
only flexion and extension, the former joint through a maximum 
arc of 120® and the latter through one of 90®. This flexion normally 
is entirely toward the palm from a straight angle, paralleling the 
direction of flexion at the hand-knuckles, and acting in con- 
junction with this in a manner similar to the thumb-movements. 

Vertical Movements 

/SAowMer-GircZZe.— Vertical movement is possible in the shoulder 
by contracting the muscles of the neck and upper back. It produces, 
if we exclude a slight forward motion, what is popularly termed 
“ shrugging the shoulders The range of this vertical motion 
is limited, seldom exceeding three or four inches, and thus is in 
accordance with the function of stability characteristic of this joint. 
On account of this vertical movement it is entirely possible to move 
the fingers through an equal vertical distance without any motion 
whatever in shoulder, elbow, wrist, or finger-joints. Accordingly, 
the hands may be brought into contact with the piano keys and 
withdrawn vertically from them through a short distance by 
muscular activity restricted entirely to the shoulder-girdle. A 
modification of this motion is used at times in placing fortissimo 
chords. In Fig. 8 and the following similar figures, s = shoulder ; 
e = elbow ; w = wrist ; /,/,/ = finger-joints. 



20 


PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

Shoulder' J oinL — The movement of arm^abduction and-adduction 
at the shoulder makes vertical movement at the elbow possible, 
and, through this, at the wrist and fingers. This movement, when 
unaccompanied by other compensatory movements, takes place 
in an arc of which the length of the upper arm (humerus) is the 
radius, and the shoulder is the centre. On account of the length 



6 

0 

W 

0 "• 

f f f 

</""■' ' W 

^ 

0 

0 ■ 



tron/c relaxation 
Fig. 8. 

of the humerus, the range of motion is considerable. The motion 
may readily be observed by bending the arm at the elbow to a right 
angle, lifting the upper arm sidewise from the body to a level wdth 
the shoulder and then bringing it down to* the side of the body. 
The hands may thus be brought into contact with the keys through 
a considerable vertical range, this time with lateral movement 
at the shoulder-joint. 



The rotation of the shoulder-joint likewke permits vertical motion 
of the fore-arm and hand, although in this case, the elbow must 
be flexed, whereas in the first illustration the flexed elbow was not 
necessary. 

Again, if the rest of the arm be held fixed, this movement, trans- 
mitted to the hand, becomes a vertical arc, the radius of which is 



THE SKELETON 21 

the length of the fore-arm and hand, and the centre of which is 
the elbow. No actual movement in the elbow-joint takes place, 
the entire rotation resulting from a fixed arm and a rotation of 
the head of the humerus in the shoulder-socket. For the proper 
execution of this movement, as Fig. 95 shows, the upper arm must 
be held away from the side of the body, not close to it or in front 
of it. A perfect t 3 rpe of this motion demands a horizontal upper- 
arm. As the upper-arm is lowered, the vertical movement of the 
hand is taken care of, more and more, by movement at the elbow. 
Elbow-Joint. 

Since the elbow-joint is a simple hinge-joint, vertical movement 
at this articulation is possible when its axis is horizontal. This 
axis-position is present when the upper arm hangs vertically, 
Fig. 10. As the upper arm is lifted away from the body, this 



elbow flexion 

Fig. 10. 

axis no longer remains horizontal and the vertical hand-movement 
resulting from elbow flexion and extension no longer takes place 
in a vertical plane, but deviates from this plane to the extent that 
the position of the upper arm deviates from it. 

This difference is important, since it means that any vertical 
descent of the fore-arm with the upper-arm held away from the 
body — and this touch-form is constantly used in piano-playing — 
involves rotation of the upper-arm : a movement easily overlooked, 
because the upper-arm does not change its angles with regard 
to the adjoining parts, but merely turns on its own longitucSnal 
axis. The degree of rotation is determined by the extent to which 
the arm is aMucted from the vertical position. It may occur at 
any angle, however, because the shoulder-joint is a ball-and-socket 
joint which permits rotation of the humerus regardless of the angle 
at which this bone is held. 



22 


PHYSIOLOGICAL OK6ANISM 


The older piano pedagogy, in demanding that the arm be kept 
at the side of the body, made particular use of the rotation of the 
humerus, for, by rotating the upper arm in this position, with a 
flexed elbow the hand is carried through a horizontal arc, from 
any position of which its vertical stroke is possible. The impossibility 
of using this touch-form in actual piano-playing is discussed under 
Horizontal Movements, where it is also illustrated. The vertical 
aspect of this touch does not introduce any characteristic that is 
not present in any combination of humerus-rotation and elbow- 
. flexion. 

Radio- Ulnar J oint. 

The radio-ulnar joint itself is incapable of producing vertical 
motion in either of the bones which make up this articulation, 
but, as a joint of rotation, it can produce vertical movement in 
any part of the hand not in line with the axis of rotation. Fig. 11 
illustrates this axis, looking directly along the right fore-arm 
from the elbow to the wrist. 

77 


/ 



\ 

\ 

Fig. 11. 

E = Axis of rotation ; H = the right hand, pronated position ; 
T = position of thumb ; P = position of fifth finger ; A = cross- 
section of fore-arm. 

Any turning in the axis R will obviously cause a vertical move- 
ment at the points T and F, and the farther these points are from 
the axis, the greater will be the range of this vertical movement. 
The movement need not be restricted to the thumb and fifth finger ; 
for, as soon as the wrist is turned laterally, the axis no longer passes 



THE SKELETON 23 

thiough the fourth finger, and any finger may be shifted out of 
the line of the axis of rotation and hence receive vertical displace- 
ment when the fore-arm turns at the radio-ulnar joint. As a result 
of this motion, the fingers can receive a vertical stroke equivalent 
in height to the finger-stroke itself (movement in the hand-knuckle). 
This touch-type we shall find to be the basis of one form of the 
piano tremolo. 

Wrist-Joint. 

Vertical movement of the hand from the wrist is possible when 
the hand is either completely pronated or supinated. The latter 
position is excluded in piano-playing since the palm would be up. 
In the pronated position the vertical movement of the hand is a 
simple movement of considerable angular range, though the relative 



wrht flexion 

Fio. 12. 

shortness of the hand compared to the length of the arm makes the 
absolute range small. As the fore-arm leaves the fully pronated 
position and approaches supination, the vertical movement of the 
hand is no longer entirely confined to wrist-flexion and extension, 
but gradually brings into play wrist-abduction and adduction. 
These motions are rather limited, especially on the thumb side of 
the hand. On the fiifth-finger side abduction is suflSciently free to 
permit the hand to be abducted, through a small range, regardless of 
the angle of pronation. Fig. 12 shows vertical hand movement as 
used in a wrist staccato. 


If we exclude from consideration the limited ab- and adduction of 
the fiingers in the hand-knuckles, the vertical motion of the 
fingers is possible only in the pronated position of the fore-arm. 



22 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

The older piano pedagogy, in demanding that the arm be kept 
at the side of the body, made particular use of the rotation of the 
humerus, for, by rotating the upper arm in this position, with a 
flexed elbow the hand is carried through a horizontal arc, from 
any position of which its vertical stroke is possible. The impossibility 
of using this touch-form in actual piano-pla 3 dng is discussed under 
Horizontal Movements, where it is also illustrated. The vertical 
aspect of this touch does not introduce any characteristic that is 
not present in any combination of humerus-rotation and elbow- 
flexion. 

Eadio-Ulmr Joint, 

The radio-ulnar joint itself is incapable of producing vertical 
motion in either of the bones which make up this articulation, 
but, as a joint of rotation, it can produce vertical movement in 
any part of the hand not in line with the axis of rotation. Fig. 11 
illustrates this axis, looking directly along the right fore-arm 
from the elbow to the wrist. 

77 


/ 



\ 


Fig. 11. 

R = Axis of rotation ; H = the right hand, pronated position ; 
T == position of thumb ; F = position of fifth finger ; A = cross- 
section of fore-arm. 

Any turning in the axis R will obviously cause a vertical move- 
ment at the points T and F, and the farther these points are from 
the axis, the greater will be the range of this vertical movement. 
The movement need not be restricted to the thumb and fifth finger ; 
for, as soon as the wrist is turned laterally, the axis no longer passes 


THE SKELETON* 23 

tkrougli the fourth finger, and any finger may be shifted out of 
the line of the axis of rotation and hence receive vertical displace- 
ment when the fore-arm turns at the radio-ulnar joint. As a result 
of this motion, the fingers can receive a vertical stroke equivalent 
in height to the finger-stroke itself (movement in the hand-knuckle). 
This touch-type we shall find to be the basis of one form of the 
piano tremolo. 

Wrist-Joint 

Vertical movement of the hand from the wrist is possible when 
the hand is either completely pronated or supinated. The latter 
position is excluded in piano-playing since the palm would be up. 
In the pronated position the vertical movement of the hand is a 
simple movement of considerable angular range, though the relative 



wrht flexion 

Rg. 12. 

shortness of the hand compared to the length of the arm makes the 
absolute range small. As the fore-arm leaves the fully pronated 
position and approaches supination, the vertical movement of the 
hand is no longer entirely confined to wrist-flexion and extension, 
but gradually brings into play wrist-abduction and adduction. 
These motions are rather limited, especially on the thumb side of 
the hand. On the fiith-finger side abduction is sufficiently free to 
permit the hand to be abducted, through a small range, regardless of 
the angle of pronation. Fig, 12 shows vertical hand movement as 
used in a wrist staccato. 


If we exclude from consideration the limited ab- and adduction of 
the fingers in the hand-knuckles, the vertical motion of the 
fingers is possible only in the pronated position of the fore-arm. 



24 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGAHISM 

Any one of the finger-joints is capable of vertical movement from 
this position, but in piano-playing the most work is done at the hand- 
knuckles (metacarpo-phalangeal joints), a fact that the excessive 
curve of the finger-joints sometimes obscures. With the hand in 
a horizontal position, these joints are pre-e mi nently fitted for 
vertical movements of the fingers. As soon as the hand deviates 
from the horizontal, for example when it slants toward the fifth 
finger, the finger-stroke can no longer be vertical. The vertical 
stroke is advisable, pianistically, because the piano-keys move 
in a vertical plane. Any slanting stroke, since it involves a change 
in the direction of the force and that of the body acted upon, 
means so much wasted work. (See Mechanical Principles, 2, 7.) 
The fact that in piano-playing slanting strokes are usual in all 



finger flexion 

Fig. 13 . 

caps does not change this fact. But when a vertical stroke is 
possible, it is physiological economy to use it. 

The thumb-stroke differs from the stroke of the other fingers. 
Flexion of the thumb is basically at right-angles to that of the fingers. 
This is shown in the grasping-reflex, in which, as the fingers close, 
the thumb closes toward the fingers. If the fingers move vertically 
the thumb moves horizontally. In order to keep the hand in 
the horizontal playing-position and yet move the thumb vertically, 
abduction at the last thumb-joint (metacarpo-phalangeal) and 
not flexion, is necessary. Moreover, this abduction is accompanied 
by a small amount of rotation, so that the thumb-stroke is, in reality, 
never a stra^ht vertical line, but always somewhat of a vertical 
arc. This arc is too small to make any actual difference in the tonal 
results of playing. The physiological difference, however, between 



THE SKELETON 25 

thumb-stroke and finger-stroke is decided ; one is a movement 
of abduction, the other a movement of flexion. 
Movernent-Coo^ibinations. 

The preceding study of the movement of each joint has shown 
that the movement which finally brings the finger-tips into contact 
with the piano-keys, that is to say, vertical movement at the finger- 
tips, can be produced, within certain limits, by any joint of the entire 
upper limb : the shoulder-girdle, shoulder, elbow, radio-ulnar 
joint, wrist-joint, or hand-knuckles. It has also shown that as 
movement at a joint takes place, the m aximum ejBS.ciency of this 
and allied movements is possible with the arm in a certain position, 
but that the same end-movement, produced in the same way, 
is not possible with the arm in another position. Illustrations of 
this shift of function have already been given with most joints, 
a conspicuous example being the gradual addition of humerus 
rotation to elbow-flexion as the arm is lifted sidewise from the body. 
(See especially Eig. 95.) Given these facts, it follows that any 
heyboari movement of considerable range involves a constantly 
changing coordination of movement among the various joints 
concerned. It is never made in precisely the same way for any 
two positions of the arm. What to the eye is a simple continuous 
vertical movement, may be finished by a muscular action radically 
different from that by which the movement was begun. I purposely 
restrict the definition here to vertical movements ; it holds, how- 
ever, equally well for all movements, and its importance, I hope, 
will be realized in the detailed analysis of pianistic touch-forms. 

Horizontal Movements 

Shoulder-Girdle, 

Horizontal movement by the shoulder-girdle is produced by 
bringing the shoulder-blade forward or backward, movements giving 
the stooped and the military positions. It may readily be observed 
by rotating the arm as far as possible while it hangs at the side 
of the body. This horizontal. motion is not a straight line because, 
as the shoulder is brought forward it is also brought somewhat 
inward, describing an arc. The actual extent of the horizontal 
movement is not great because stability, not mobility, is the function 
of the shoulder-girdle ; but since it acts at the centre of whole- 
arm movements, it may produce a movement of greater extent at 
the hand-end of the arm. 

Shoulder-Joint, 

By raising the arm to a level with the shoulder, horizontal move- 
ment at the shoulder-joint is possible through somewhat more 



16 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

fcliaii riinety degrees. This range is considerably increased if the 
horizontal movement of the shoulder-girdle described in the 



Fig. U. 

preceding paragraph be added. The ball-and-socket joint formation 
makes it possible to execute also a horizontal movement from the 
shoulder with the arm in any position except the completely vertical. 
The further the arm is abducted, the greater will be the range of 
this motion when projected to the elbow, wrist, or hand. With 
horizontally extended arm, the hand will describe a semi-circle 
the radius of which is the length of the entire arm, and, if we assume 
this to be two feet, the hand will describe a horizontal arc of more 
than six feet. As the arm is lowered from the horizontal position, 
or as any of its parts, fore-arm or hand, is not kept in line with 
the line of rotation, this distance decreases until at the completely 
vertical position it is zero, so long as movement in other joints 
does not act compensatorily. Horizontal movement of the fore- 
arm and hand may be produced by rotation of the humerus in 
the shoulder-socket. Just as, with the humerus held horizontally 
and the elbow flexed, rotation of the upper arm produces a vertical 
movement of the fore-arm and hand, so with the humerus held 
vertically, and the elbow flexed, rotation of the upper arm will 
produce horizontal movement of the fore-arm and hand, Fig. 15. 

A = side view ; B = top view ; S = shoulder ; E = elbow ; 
H, H^ = various positions of the hand. 

Forward and backward movement at the shoulder can likewise 
produce horizontal motion of the fore-arm and hand in this position. 
If the humerus stands at any angle and the arm be drawn back 
so that the elbow describes an arc as it passes the body, this arc 
may be made horizontally, since the humerus will be describing a 
cone of movement of which the shoulder socket is the apex and the 



THE SKELETON 27 

elbow describes the ciiCTunfeTence of the base. (Fig. 20.) All such 
moyenLents in a single plane when initiated from a ceni^, such as 
the shoulder socket, are necessarily curved movements. Movement 
in a horizontal straight line is possible only when some other joint 
makes a compensatory movement, as the humerus swings through 
its arc. These combinations are analysed later. 

EWoiD-Jowi. 

Casual observation of elbow movement seems to indicate that 
horizontal movement of the fore-arm can be produced by elbow- 
flexion and extension, that is to say, by bending the elbow regardless 
of the position of the upper arm. This is not true. Horizontal 
movement from the elbow demands a horizontal upper arm. Since 
the elbow is a simple hinge-joint, it can operate in one plane only, 
and only when its axis is vertical can it describe a horizontal move- 



Vm. 15 . 


ment. As soon as the upper arm leaves its horizontal position, 
any horizontal movement of the fore-arm is accompanied by a 
rotation of the upper-arm, the extent of the latter varying directly 
with the amount of deviation from the horizontal. This rotation 
can readily be observed if the movement be watched on the naked 
arm. Observation of an articulating skeleton is, of course, mudi 
more convincing. Here we meet again with an instance in which 
movement apparently restricted to the fore-arm is in reality made 
possible only by rotation of the upper-arm. And as we proceed, 
we shall And that shoulder-articulations play a fax more important 
part in piano-playing than that which is generally accorded them. 
Badio-Ulmr J(mA. 

Althou^ this articulation establishes and maintains the hori- 
zontal position of the hand, it cannot itself produce horizontal 
movement. Its sole movement is the rolling of the ulna over 
the radius, and althou^ the movement alone is not horizontal. 



28 


PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 


it is helpful in combination with movements at other joints, making 
horizontal hand-movement possible, with retained horizontal 
hand-position, regardless of the angles of movement of the 
upper-arm. 

Wrist-Joint, 

Two t 3 ?pes of horizontal movement are possible : flexion and 
extension with the hand in a vertical plane (normal supination 
or pronation of the fore-arm) ; abduction and adduction with the 
hand in a horizontal plane (pronated position of the fore-arm). 
The first tjrpe of movement is pianistically useless since it restricts 
the playing to the side of the fifth finger. The second tjrpe is 
very useful, especially in passages of legato thirds or sixths, and 
other polyphonic work. In any case the range of ab- and adduction 
is rather small, but since the width of a single piano-key (about 
nine-tenths of an inch) is often all the distance needed to make 
possible the playing of a passage, this range is, at times, sufficient. 
The abduction and adduction at the wrist are possible only with 
the hand in line with the fore-arm. If the hand be flexed at the 
wrist either toward the volar or the dorsal side, horizontal hand- 
movement is made differently, and is the result, not of wrist abduc- 
tion and adduction, but of fore-arm supination and pronation. 
That is to say, the motion then involves the radio-uhiar joint. 
In piano-playing, if the elbow is on a level with the keyboard, 
horizontal motion of the hand may be initiated by wrist abduction 
and adduction. If the elbow is above the level of the keyboard, 
fore-arm rotation must be used in order to move the hand hori- 
zontally from the wrist. This is an instance of movement assisted 
by the radio-ulnar joint, another example in which a change in 
the position of parts of the arm not actually makmg the movement, 
necessitates a radical change in the mechanics of the movement 
without in the least interfering with the end-movement itself. 
Moreover, since the change in the position of the fore-arm feom 
horizontal to non-horizontal may be very gradual, so the shift of 
mechanical operation may be very gradual. This shift of activity 
within a continuous movement ^1 be referred to frequently in 
the discussion of muscular action in general and in that of pianistic 
touch-forms in particular. 

Finger-Joints, 

With the hand in the horizontal playing-position, the only 
horizontal movement of the fingers possible is the limited abduction 
and adduction at the hand-knuckles. Pianistically even this 
limited spreading of the fingers is of great importance. In the 



THE SKELETON 29 

analysis of movement at the various joints the fact was already 
mentioned that this spreading is widest and easiest with fully 
extended fingers and that it is entirely impossible with fiiUy curved 
fingers (QO'" flexion at the hand-knuckles). 

The disadvantage^ of the thumb-position at the key-board 
mentioned under vertical movements, is now replaced by a particular 
advantage for horizontal movements. The horizontal movement 
of the thumb (as in passing it under the hand in scales and arpeggios), 
is a natural flexion of this member, accompanied by a slight amount 
of rotation. The range of the movement, considering the relative 
shortness of the thumb, is rather great ; in any event it exceeds the 
lateral movement of any of the other fingers. 

Horizontal Hand-Movements, 

Horizontal movements of the hand, therefore, are possible from 
any joint of the whole arm. In this multiphcity of origins, horizontal 
movements are entirely like vertical movements. In both cases the 
same end-movement may be made in a number of ways. And, 
as in vertical movements, we find in horizontal movements a constant 
shift of reaction for each continuous movement. As the movement 
itself changes the spatial and mechanical relationship among the 
parts of the arm, so new reactions are needed to meet these changes. 
The transition is never made abruptly, but very gradually, so long 
as no external force suddenly inhibits or reinforces the movement. 

Multi-planar Movements 

In selecting for detailed treatment vertical and horizontal move- 
ments, I have perhaps conveyed a wrong impression of the 
importance and of the isolation of movement in these two planes. 
The selection was made solely to permit concise and clear exposition, 
not on account of fundamental differences between the vertical 
and horizontal planes, and the slanting and the multi-planar 
or curved movements. The conclusions reached apply absolutely 
in principle to movement in any one other plane. This leaves the 
multi-planar movements to be considered. 

A very brief, reflection will show that in piano-playing very few 
movements are made in any single plane or direction. Horizontal 
movements are usually combined with vertical movements. Nor 
is the change abrupt. Instead, practically aU extended move- 
ments involve motion in many planes (multi-planar movements), 
and most frequently in the minute changes of direction resulting 
in curves. These forms complicate the mechanical reactions 
enormously, without, however, invalidating any of the priuciples 



30 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

outlined for tke straiglit-line movements. In order to save needless 
repetition, I sKall defer tteir analysis until the discussion of the 
various pianistic touch-forms. 

At this point it is necessary to mention that multi-planar move- 
ments are compounds of movement in single planes, and that curved 
movements are angular movements in an in:^te number of planes. 
The principle is the same as that which considers the circle as made 
up of an infinite number of triangles whose bases are straight lines. 
The mechanical advantage of curved movements over angular 
movements is considerable. If the movement be angular, at each 
abrupt change of direction a sudden mechanical readjustment 
becomes necessary, the effect of which the muscles cannot readily 
foretell or forestall. All smooth, steady movements in the whole 
field of mechanics, that involve more than one direction, are move- 
ments in curves . The principles of all machines, from the mechanism 
of a watch to that of a turbine, are based upon rotation. Physiological 
mechanics are no exception to this rule. It is impossible to make 
a steady movement in more than one plane any other way than in 
a curve. This point cannot be too strongly emphasized. It is in 
partial, though not complete conflict with the ‘‘ fixed position ” 
school of piano pedagogy. As the deductions made for vertical 
and horizontal movements have shown, the entire purpose of the 
mechanics of the arm is to shift the centre of the work in a manner 
permitting the movement to go on unbrokenly . Such a shift caimot 
take place abruptly at one point or another. And, as a matter of 
fact, the various detailed cases considered have shown that it 
does not so take place. Nor do players play in angular movements ; 
they use curvilinear motions almost entirely. This may be seen 
m the photographs in later chapters. 

Keyboaed Application 

The various articulations of the trunk, shoulder, arm, hand, 
and fingers fit this compound appendage of the human body 
preeminently to finely controlled movements. A piano technique, 
since it operates entirely by means of the physiological mechanism, 
can be effective only to the extent to which it takes the structure 
and function of the various parts of the organism into consideration. 
Several pedagogic principles, accordingly, find their explanation 
in the anatomy and physiology of the joints. 

In the first place, the ranges and direction of motion for the various 
joints furnish a concrete anatomical basis for the selection of various 
skeletal arm- and hand-positions in piano-playing, as more desirable 
than others. 



31 


THE SKELETOIf 

Movement around a joint, since it is constantly determined, 
in part at least, by expansion and compression, extension and con- 
traction of physiological tissues, cannot occur "vrith equal ease, 
or against equal resistance, throughout the range of motion of the 
joint. It is easiest and smoothest near the middle of the range, 
increasing in difficulty and awkwardness as it approaches either 
extreme of the range. The physiological reason for this, in extreme 
movements, is the approach to the limit of extensibility of the 
tissues immediately surrounding the joint and that of the controUing 
muscles. Ease of motion, as we shall see, means mavirmiTn 
accuracy of kinesthetic judgment and minimum fatigue. Both 
of these are prime essentials in piano-plajdng. Accordingly a 
finger, hand, and arm position permitting the joints to operate 
near the middle of their range, is, other things equal, the most 
desirable for piano-playing. This can be determined for each joint. 

The upper arm (humerus) since it abducts between a vertical 
and a horizontal position theoretically has its easiest range at 45°. 
But abduction acts against gravity, so that the ease of range is 
skewed toward the vertical. 

The elbow flexes from a straight angle to 30° or 40°. But right- 
angle flexion already brings the flesh on the volar surface of the 
lower and the upper arm into contact, and flexion beyond this 
point has this additional resistance to overcome. The elbow bent 
through an arc somewhat less than a right angle, therefore, gives 
approximately the easiest position for this joint. 

The lateral movements at the wrist are rather restricted in range, 
so that any ease of motion would be through a proportionately 
small range. Since turning the hand extends sUghtly further toward 
the fifth-finger side, than toward the thumb side, the position of 
easiest movement would be slightly outward from the straight 
position of the hand, and accounts for the readiness with which 
the hands of imtrained pupils assume the ‘‘ wrist-in ” position at 
the keyboard. The lateral wrist movement is important on 
account of its effect upon the axis of rotation of the fore-arm. 
By turning the hand outward slightly at the wrist, the fore-arm 
axis, which in the unturned hand, passes through the fourth finger, 
may be shifted to the third finger, thus dividing the hand more 
symmetrically. A further lateral turn at the wrist will shift the 
axis still further toward the thumb side of the hand. The practical 
benefit of this shifting will be seen when we discuss the tremolo 
touch and polyphonic playing. 

Elexion and extension at the wrist embrace an extreme arc of 
180°. Normally this falls equally on the two sides of the position 



32 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

wLen the hand axis is a prolongation of the fore-arm axis, which, 
accordingly, becomes the easiest position. So far as the position 
of the wrist alone is concerned, the old instruction books, now 
considered obsolete, were absolutely right in demanding a position 
in which the back of the hand and the arm form a straight line. 
The awkwardness of this hand-position is the result of the positions 
it necessitated for joints other than the wrist-joint. 

The easiest range of action for the three finger- joints may be 
similarly determiued. When this is done and allowance made for 
the resistance of the fleshy volar surface of the fingers in extreme 
flexion, the mid-points will be near 40° for the metacarpophalangeal 
joint (hand-knuckle), 46° for the middle joint, and 30° for the nail- 
joint. 

A combination of these joint-angles gives us the easiest position 
of the hand as a whole. The final position of the finger-tip would 
be the result of a summation of all the angles, beginning at the wrist. 
This gives an angle over 100°, which measured from the horizontal 
wrist position would force the finger-tip beyond the perpendicular 
position and bring the finger-nail in contact with the surface of 
the piano-key. 

Apart from the infla mm ation which usually follows constant 
striking of the nail against the key, the impact noise, also, is 
musically undesirable. Consequently the fleshy part of the finger- 
tip is best fitted for striking the key. In order to permit this, the 
angle of curvature of the finger must be reduced to about 80°. 
This may be done in either of two ways : by decreasing the angle 
at one or more joints, or by dividing the difference among the four 
joints. The former produces the hand-position in use a generation 
or so ago. Here the excess curve was entkely taken up by the hand- 
knuckles so that these joints are fuUy extended as in Pig. 16a. 
Or if the nail-joints, be changed, the middle-finger joints are 
excessively curved, as in Pig. 168, a position occasionally found in 
pupils whose curvature of the nail-joints is defective. Either 
position necessitates movement near the extreme of range in some 
joint and is physiologically undesirable for normal position. By 
dividing the excess curvature among the various joints, the hand- 
position recommended by modem piano pedagogy is produced. 
Here the wrist is slightly depressed, the back of the hand ascends 
toward the hand-knuckle, and each finger-joint is extended slightly 
from the position given, as shown in Plate I, Pig, 166. All joints 
now move through an approximate mid-range, thereby permitting 
maximum accuracy with minimum fatigue. The choice of this 
hand-position in preference to others, apart from later considerations 



THE SKELETON 33 

of muscular action, is thus seen to be entirely in accord mth the 
anatomical structure of the fingers and hand, and not the result 
of whim and fancy. 

A combination of the foregoing positions produces what may 
logically be called the normal arm-wrist-hand-position. It is the 
basic position of reference, and is useful for purposes of orientation, 
although it is seldom applied intact for any length of time in actual 
piano-plajdng, which, we must remember, is movement, not 
position. 

From the practical standpoint, an important conclusion to be 
drawn from the articulations of the joints is that, with a few . 
exceptions at the extremes of range, any point in the space covered 
by the arm and its appendages, can be reached in various ways. 
Sitting in the normal position at the keyboard, for example, 

can be reached with the upper arm in any position from complete 
abduction to complete adduction. Or this key can be reached with 
the fore-arm in any position from complete extension to 90° flexion 
(the latter by bending the trunk forward, bringing the shoulder 
more nearly over the keyboard). One can, further, play the key 
from any position whatever of the wrist, lateral or vertical, and 
with any finger in any position. Finally, by bringing the left 
shoulder forward and extending the arm, the same key can be reached 
with any finger of the left hand. Practically any other key can 
be reached in as many and more ways. Four pedagogical principles 
foUow, which should constantly be recalled when position is being 
stressed by the teacher at the expense of movement : 

(1) Any key on the piano may be reached efiectively in a multi- 
tude of ways. 

(2) The position in which any key is played is determined by the 
position and maimer of playing the preceding and succeeding 
keys. 

(3) The best manner of making a movement to a certain point 
on the keyboard varies with the individual, and, among other 
things, is determined by skeletal structure. 

(4) The physiologically best movement is the one permitting 
motion near the middle of range of the joints involved. 

Another conclusion to be drawn from the skeletal structure of 
the shoulder region and arm is that any extended movement of 
hand or finger involves movements in aU the other joints. Or, 
if we except the few extreme instances of minimal and restricted 
movement, we may say : every actual movement made in piano- 
playing involves simultaneous movements in various joints, the 
degrees of participation varying as the movement continues. 



34 PHYSIOLOaiCAL OEGANISM 

(See Geometries of Movement.) This is necessary in any structure 
organized as the arm is organized. The vertical finger-stroke, 
wMe apparently merely a movement in the hand-knuckle, is 
accompanied by a slight extension in the two interphalangeal 
joints, otherwise the top of the nail, and not the fleshy part of 
the finger tip would stnke the piano-key. In the puttmg under 
of the thumb in scale and arpeggio work, flexion in the first joint 
is necessarily accompanied by extension in the other two thumb- 
joints, so that the nail-joint remains parallel to the key, avoiding 
the striking of two adjacent keys. Even in hand-staccato, which 
. appears to the eye, perhaps, as the most isolated technical move- 
ment, a slight opposite motion of the fore-arm may be detected, 
not to mention motion in the shoulder iE the passage be extended. 
The so-called simple arm-drop ”, a free falling of the arm, and 
the exercise given to beginners to insure relaxation, if accompanied 
by key-contact, involves some movement in practically all arm 
and finger-joints and is not restricted, by any means, to movement 
in the shoulder-joint. In other words, whenever any part of the 
body changes its position with regard to an adjacent part of the 
body, movement has taken place in the joint between the parts, 
and often in joints closer to the trunk. 

It is true that from a skeletal standpoint alone movement may 
be restricted to a single joint ; but in actual piano-playing such 
complete restriction, although often apparently taught, is not 
appUed. The reason for this is evident from the analysis of 
mechanical action and reaction, and from the action of the muscles 
described in a later chapter. Nor is the range of movement for each 
of the joints clearly dflEerentiated from that of each other joint. 
Skeletal movement is not marked by a position on one side of which 
all movement m one joint takes place, and on the other side, all 
movement m another joint. Instead there are regions of movement 
in which the various joint-movements overtop. A movement 
startiug essentially with an articulation in a single joint, will, if 
extended, gradually bring into play other joints, and the exact 
point at which this spread or transfer takes place cannot be clearly 
determined, since it in no way interferes with the continuity or 
smoothness of the movement. As a matter of fact the smoothness 
depends upon just such a gradual spreading or transfer of activity. 
This is generally known as the coordination of movement, a subject 
that will be treated in detail in a later chapter. Its mention at 
this point is advisable to e3j)lain the fact that what is considered 
by the layman, and by many piano teachers, movement in merely 
one joint, is often a very complex movement involving articulation 



THE SKELETON 35 

in several joints. For the piano teacher localization of a defect 
in motor adjustment in the proper joint is of fundamental import- 
ance, because, only when the source of trouble is located can remedial 
measures be applied intelligently. 

Shoulder-Girdle. 

Vertical movements of the arm are the result of movements 
in the shoulder-girdle and shoulder-joint. Withdrawmg of the 
arm-weight from the piano-keys is due to a contraction of the weight 
from the entire shoulder-girdle, and not to a “ stiffness ” in the 
shoulder-joint. Even the neck may be involved. This condition 
is typified in the expression “ shrugging the shoulders ”, and is 
caused not by movement m the shoulder itself but in the shoulder- 
girdle. 

All movements demanding the passages of the arm in front of 
the body, illustrated in the passages which demand a crossing of 
the hands, or a playing of the right hand in the bass and the left 
hand in the treble region, and, of course, the reverse movements, 
are primarily movements of the shoulder-girdle, demanding a 

stooped ” shoulder position. They are often erroneously assigned 
to the shoulder-joint entirely. 

Shoulder-Movement. 

The great mobility of the shoulder-joint, (not of the shoulder- 
girdle) makes it serviceable in many diverse movements. One of 
its important functions pianistically, is to permit the vertical 
movement of the fore-arm used in playing strong, detached chords. 
These are not played entirely “ from the elbow ”, but in addition 
by a rotation of the humerus in its socket at the shoulder. The 
elbow being at the same tune bent, is forced to transmit this rotation 
into a vertical motion of the fore-arm, hand, and fingers, in all 
positions in which the upper arm is not vertical. (See Fig. 96.) 

The forward and backward motion takes care of the placing of 
the hands forward on the keys, and their reverse removal, as well 
as the shifting from the white to the black keys. It also aids the 
shoulder girdle in permitting extended lateral movements into 
the extreme ranges of the keyboard. 

Abduction and adduction likewise contribute to lateral move- 
ments of less extent. The playing of a^scale upward from middle 
C thxou^ several octaves is accompanied by abduction in the right 
shoulder-joint. In fact any lateral movement along the keyboard, 
extending beyond the five^ger limit, is made with some ad- or 
abduction at the shoulder. This includes scales, arpeggios, hand- 
skips, octave passages on non-repeated keys, and all mixed figures 
demanding a sidewise shift of the hand. 



36 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 

Since the combination of these movements cover all three 
dimensions used in piano-playing, the vertical, the lateral- 
horizontal, and the forward-backward horizontal, the importance of 
the shoulder-joint movements in piano -playing is manifest. This 
importance is often overlooked since the amount of movement is 
minimal at this point (necessarily so, since it is. the base of move- 
ment), whereas the maximum amount of movement is in the hand 
or fore-arm, where it can be much more readily seen, and to which 
the source of movement is, therefore, falsely attributed. 

ElboW’Movement 

In piano technique elbow flexion and extension are most pro- 
nounced in lateral shifts approximately within an octave. Beyond 
this range shoulder abduction, as we have seen, aids the shift. 
The vertical movements of the fore-arm, with abducted humerus, 
have their source partly in the shoulder. 

Bctdio-Ulnar Movement, 

This joint, located in the region of the elbow, is the source of all 
keyboard movements involving the rotation of the fore-arm, 
as in the tremolo, broken-chords, melodic accentuation, and, some- 
times, phrase-release. The range of rotation causes an unequal 
distribution of arcs for the thumb and the fifth fingers. Accordingly, 
it is much easier to hold the fifth finger on a key and to lift the thumb 
into a vertical plane above it, than to hold the thumb and lift the 
fifth finger into such a position. When the teacher insists upon 
this extxeme latter motion, the last forty-five degrees of it is usually 
made, or at least accompanied, by abduction at the shoulder. This 
points to the fact that, in teaching the tremolo, a moderate amount 
of rotation, or at least less rotation over the thumb as pivot than 
the fifth finger, is necessary, if the object be to restrict the move- 
ment to the radio-ulnar joint. Broken chords, particularly where 
the lower notes of the chords do not require a holding of the keys, 
are most effectively done by a rotation of the fore-arm. I refer 
to such passages as in Chopin’s Etude in Wq, Op. 10, No. 11. 

Wrist-Movement, 

Contrary to popular belief, the wrist has no movement of rotation 
at the wrist, but only because the wrist is a part of the entire rotating 
meinber. The source of this movement of rotation has been 
discussed in the preceding paragraph. 

The most widely used wrist-motion is flexion and extension, 
having its chief key-board application in the hand-staccato, or 
wrist-staccato. This is the touch used in normal octave passage, 



THE SKELETON 37 

staccato cliords, and staccato in general. It is a touch-form of 
considerable range since it is a part excursion, of a joint having 
movement through 150° or more. Examples of its use abound in 
piano literature : any Staccato Etude, such as Rubinstein’s 
C major ; the staccato chord variation of Schumann’s Symphonic 
Etudes ; the staccato variation of Mendelssohn’s Variations 
Serieuses. 

The lateral movement of the wrist is skeletally much more 
restricted. It is useful in extended broken chord work, character- 
istic of the works of Schumann, Chopin, and Brahms. It likewise 
aids in the passing under of the thumb and the passing over of the 
hand in scales, and more markedly so, in arpeggio work. The attempt 
to restrict this technique entirely to thumb-movement cannot 
be effectively carried out, since it robs the total movement of the 
freedom necessary for a plastic performance of the arpeggio. This 
point will again be touched upon under Individual Differences and 
imder Touch Forms. 

Thumb-Movement, 

Thumb-action plays a very important part in piano-technique, 
because it is the normal way of extendmg a legato beyond the 
five-jSnger limit. The diBEculty in developing a proper thumb- 
action is found in the double-action necessary. The normal thumb 
movement is flexion and extension at the carpo-metacarpal joint. 
This movement readily permits the passing of the thumb under 
the hand. But in order to depress the piano-key, a vertical move- 
ment is necessary, which, with the thumb in a flexed position (under 
the palm of the hand, as in scale-playing), is not a natural movement. 
It is this double movement, in planes at right angles to one another, 
that makes the difficulty. The pianistically opposite movement, 
that of passing-over the hand, is, in reality, not an opposite move- 
ment. It is not a hand-movement, but an elbow movement, 
accompanied by humerus rotation and by passive flexion at the carpo- 
metacarpal joint of the thumb, and is more readily made because 
it does not demand a vertical thumb-stroke. For this reason 
pupils as a rule find descending scales in the right hand, or ascending 
scales in the left hand, easier than those in the reverse directions. 
In the former case the hand is passed over by movement in the 
elbow-joint and the key is played by a movement in a finger-joint 
(metacarpo-phalangeal), whereas, in the latter case, both lateral 
and vertical movements are made primarily by the same thumb- 
joint. The same observations, onj^a more extended scale, apply 
to arpeggio technique. 



38 


PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGAOTSM 

The two remaining thumb-joints aid in keeping the tip of the 
thumb parallel to the piano-key. They are flexed most when the 
thumb is in its normal position next to the second finger. As the 
thumb passes under the hand, flesdonincreases at the carpo-metacarpal 
joint, while it decreases in the two remaining joints, the middle and 
the nail-joint. Accordingly, any lateral movement of the thumb 
when applied to the piano keyboard, involves movement in all 
three thumb-joints. 

Finger-Movement 

If we allow for the difference in the direction of the movement, 
finger-stroke is the equivalent of thumb-flexion, the former acting 
vertically and the latter horizontally. Several types of finger- 
stroke are possible. By restricting the movement to the hand- 
knuckle (metacarpo-phalangeal) the finger-tip may be brought into 
contact with the piano-key by an arc movement. Fig. 104:, a,6,c, 
either with flexed or extended finger ; by simultaneous flexion in 
the three finger-joints the key may be stroked, Fig. 104c (the stroke 
staccato of the early instruction books), and, i^ally, flexion at 
the hand-knuckle may be accompanied by extension in the two other 
finger-joints, producing the vertical finger-stroke of the more recent 
pedagogy, Fig. 1046. Finger release may be a continuation of 
the key attack, resulting in an elliptical movement of the finger- 
tip, or it may reverse the movement exactly, the finger-tip returning 
over the same path described in its descent. We are here not 
concerned with the various advantages and disadvantages of these 
action-types, but merely with the possibilities for movement at 
these joints. This we have seen, is possible at any vertical angle. 
Finger flexion and extension is by far the most important pure 
finger-action used in piano-playing. And, as in the case of 
the thumb, it is seldom restricted to one joint alone, but involves 
to a great or small extent, movement in each of the fibnger-joints. 
The fifth finger, when this is lifted in the extended position, is 
a partial exception to this rule. 

If action at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints were entirely 
restricted to flexion and extension, the pkiying of chords extending 
beyond the five-finger limit would be impossible. Such a position 
demands a spreadmg of the fingers, which can occur only by 
abduction at the hand-knuckles. The construction of these joints 
is such, however, that this abduction is dependent upon the degree 
of flexion. It is greatest when the fingers are entirely extended, 
it is practically zero when the fingers are flexed to 90^. Conse- 
quently, ^eatest spread of fingers demands an entirely flat hand. 
By insisting upon an arched hand we markedly restrict the spread 



THE SKELETON 39 

of tLe fingers. Nor is this the result of greater distance demanded 
by the arched position, it is the result of the inability to abduct the 
fingers in a fiexed position. Flat fingers, therefore, m extended 
chord work are not only natural, but often the only nieans of getting 
the necessary finger spread. To demand curved fingers under such 
conditions is pedagogically unsound, since the vertical finger-stroke 
can readily take place entirely from the hand-knucHes. (Fig. 106a.) 

The preceding analysis of joint-movements furnishes the skeletal 
basis for piano-playing. It b ring s to light : 

(1) That practically all movements of piano technique are move- 
ments in more than one joint, in spite of the attempts of many 
pedagogues to restrict them to a single joint. 

(2) That the range of movement is ample to cover any point 
in the entire sphere of movement, limited by the length of the 
extended arm. 

(3) That the main source of movement is never in the joint that 
is actually moving. In order for any joint to move as a whole, 
some other joint, situated closer to the trunk, must serve as 
stationary fulcrum. 

Finally, the question arises : to what extent can the skeletal 
part of the hand or arm be modified by appropriate massage or 
so-called “ stretch-exercises ”? So far as the skeletal part itself 
is concerned, very little indeed. In order to modify the bone articu- 
lations themselves, a begnming would have to be made in early 
infancy. At this period, the temporary cartilages have not yet 
been replaced to any extent by permanent, harder bone, and hence 
are more readily subject to modification. Fortunately, the “ ti^tly- 
knit ” hand, often erroneously attributed by the teacher to joint- 
formation, is usually the res^t of supemormally ti^t hgaments, 
excessive flesh around the joints or even muscular limitation. 
Here masss^e helps considerably since all living tissue, as aU living 
matter, is biologically adaptable. On the other hand, such massage 
should be careMly administered and should never be undertaken 
with the idea of forcing physiological changes in a short tiine by 
sufficiently intense applications. These are almost invariably 
injurious ; the classical example of Schumann, with the device for 
isolating the fourth finger, may serve as a reminder. Variations 
in joint-movement are discussed in detail in the chapters on Hand 
Measurements and Individual Differences, 



CHAPTEE m 
The Muscles ' 

Opposed to the passive nature of the skeletal structure is the 
active nature of the muscles. These are the organs of movement, 
that part of the anatomical structure which makes possible, without 
outside force, the movements described in Chapter I. Muscles 
divide into two classes ; skeletal (striped) and visceral (unstriped). 
Skeletal muscle governs the bodily movements of rotation and 
translation, visceral muscle governs the activity of the internal 
organs such as the heart, lungs, and stomach. Our problem excludes 
consideration of visceral muscle. 

Shape of Muscles, 

Each muscle is a combination of a great number of muscle fibres 
or muscle cells. Usually it is thickest at or near the middle of its 
length and tapers off at both ends into tendons attached to the bones. 
The fibres are grouped into bundles of various sizes and the entire 
muscle is enclosed in a sheath. To this muscle-form, however, 
there are numerous exceptions. If the muscle divides at one end 
into two parts it gives the biceps form ; a division into three parts 
gives the triceps form. Some muscles, whose function is range 
rather than power, are long and slender, others whose function 
is power, are short and thick. In some cases the tendon at one end 
is missing, the belly forming the actual point of attachment. 

The muscle fibre of popular parlance is something essentially 
different from the muscle-&re of the anatomist. Since the muscle 
substance itself is quite soft, it is inclosed in a connective tissue, 
which, besides holding the muscle substance in place, transmits 
the pull of the fibres to the tendon and through this to the point of 
attachment, thus producing movement. 

Shoulder-Muscles. 

The shoulder embraces a group of eight muscles, five of which 
are directly attached to the shoulder-girdle and the trunk. Through 
their combined action the shoulder-girdle may be raised (shrugged), 
lowered, brought forward or backward, and circumducted. The 
muscles moving the shoulder ghdle are trunk muscles situated 
m the neck, chest, and back, not in the shoulder itself. The muscles 
in the shoulder itself move the upper-arm and not the shoulder. 

40 




Fig. 17. A, B, Cj The Muscles of the Chest, Shoulder 



TJbLbJ MUISCLES 


41 

One of the largest muscles of shoulder-movement (trapezius) 
is situated in the upper central region of the back. Its function 
is to draw the shoulder-blade backwards and upwards. By a 
combination of opposite actions of various bundles of fibres of this 
muscle, the shoulder socket may be rotated, permitting the arm 
to be raised in a forward direction above the head. Another muscle 
(latissimus dorsi) is situated lower in the back and besides controlling 
inspiration at the lungs, also adducts and rotates the upper arm. 
A smaller muscle (levator scapulae) raises the shoulder-blade, 
whereas the two rhomboid muscles control the inner end of the 
shoulder-blade. 

In the shoulder proper there are five muscles, of which the deltoid, 
which forms the fleshy outside covering of the shoulder-socket, 
is the largest. The main action of the deltoid muscle is to raise 
the arm from the side and to bring the upper arm into a horizontal 
position. The front portion of the muscle assists also in drawing 
the arm forward and the back portion in drawing it backward. 
This division of function is quite characteristic of muscles- and is 
one of the strongest arguments against the fallacy of teaching 
muscle-isolation in the various pianistic touches. Two smaller 
muscles (the supraspinatus and infraspinatus) assist the deltoid 
in its actions, the former in arm-abduction and the latter in drawing 
the arm back at the shoulder-joint. Two remaining muscles (teres 
minor and teres major) are rotators of the upper arm. 

In any shoulder movement, therefore, more than one muscle 
is usually involved ; two contribute to abduction (ri^t hand 
ascending along the keyboard), seven, exclusive of the action of 
gravity, to adduction (right hand descending along the keyboard), 
five each to forward and to backward movement (shift from white 
to black keys and reverse), three to lateral rotation and four to 
medial rotation. Moreover, if the movement be extensive, the 
action of one muscle is superseded by that of another without the 
interposition of any break. The transition is gradual, and is often 
present also in movements of small range. It accords with the 
skeletal movements described in the preceding chapter. These, 
too, have shown the gradual shift of mechanical work during the 
course of a single movement. 

Muscles of the Upper Arm. 

The muscles situated in the upper arm govern the movements 
of the fore-arm. They fall into two classes : the anterior flexors 
and supinators (biceps and brachiahs) bending the arm at the 
elbow and turning the palm of the hand up ; and the posterior 



42 PHYSIOLOGICAL OKGANISM 

extensors and pronators (triceps and subanconeus) extending 
the arm at the elbow and turning the pahn of the hand down. The 
former group is situated chiefly along the inner (volar) half of the 
upper arm ; the latter group along the back (dorsal) half of the 
upper arm. The specific action of each of these muscles is not always 
clearly defined. Thus the biceps muscle is assisted by at least two 
others in raising the fore-arm. In fact, although it is popularly 
believed that the biceps is the main if not sole flexor of the elbow 
(for example, when one says, while bending the arm ; “ feel my 
muscle ”), it is the triceps muscle (along the back of the upper arm) 
that is at least partly, if not equally, responsible for flexion, while 
the biceps is the chief supmator of the fore-arm. This is shown 
by the fact that when a person demonstrates the full prowess of 
his biceps muscle he does so invariably with the fore-arm • well 
supinated, that is to say, with the palm turned up. By flexing 
the elbow so that the back of the hand, mstead of the palm, 
approaches the shoulder, the biceps muscle will not contract, but 
mH do so if we turn the fore-arm while keeping the arm in the flexed 
position. All this proves again the essentially integrative, not 
disintegrative, action of muscles. 

Moreover, the action of the biceps itself is complex. The muscle 
usually assists movements at two joints ; the elbow and the radio- 
ulnar joint. It may assist movement at the shoulder when the 
fore-arm is fixed. The simplest combination, perhaps, of these 
actions is seen in the movement made when passing the hand to 
the mouth. 

We have, then, the interesting physiological fact that not only 
are various muscles usually active in any movement, but the same 
muscle contributes to a great variety of movements and may act 
upon more than one joint. Flexion at the elbow may involve as 
many as seven muscles and conversely, the brachioradialis 
assists in both flexion and pronation, and extension and supination. 
Its function is to bring the hand into a mid-position from either 
extreme of its range. For a picture of these muscles see 
Fig. 17, A, B, C. 

Muscles in the Fore-arm, 

The muscles situated in the fore-arm regulate the movements 
of the hand and some of those of the fingers. They fall into four 
general classes : flexors and extensors of the wrist ; flexors and 
extensors of the fingers ; pronators and supinators of the fore-arm ; 
abductors and adductors of the wrist. On account of the form of 
the wrist-joint, flexion and adduction are more extensive movements 




A 

Fig. i8. A, B, The Deep Musdes of the Fore-ami : A, veatral aspect ; B, dorsal aspect 
Modified after Gray. 


Plate IV 



c 


Fig. i8. C, D. The Supeificial Muscles of the Foieatm : C, dorsal aspect * 
D, ventral aspect. Modified after Gray. ' 


{To face p. 43 


43 


THE MUSCLES 

than extension and abduction. In any movement more than one 
muscle is involved. In flexion and extension of the wrist two sets 
of muscles may be active : the flexors and extensors of the hand 
(carpus) and those of thumb and fingers. If the wrist be flexed 
or extended with the hand in a fist-form, the movement wiD be less 
than when the fingers are extended also . This illustrates the summa- 
tion of the action of the two sets of muscles. The extensors of the 
fingers aid the flexors to bend the hand forward. It is more notice- 
able here in flexion than in extension. 

The wrist-joint bends more readily backward than forward, 
a remnant of the time when the fore-limbs were stiU used for loco- 
motion, which also accounts for the fact that the hand and finger 
knuckles do just the opposite. The greater range of lateral wrist 
motion toward the fifth-finger side of the hand is the result, not 
so much of muscular action, as of skeletal structure, the ulnar bone 
being shorter than the radius. Wrist abduction and adduction, 
moreover, depend upon the exfcensor-flexor position of the wrist. 
When the wrist is bent back (dorsaUy flexed) abduction and adduc-. 
tion at the wrist are impossible and are replaced by supination and 
pronation of the fore-arm, so that with the hand out of line with 
the fore-arm we cannot turn the hand sidewise without rotating 
the fore-arm in the radio-ulnar joint. Lateral wrist motion, 
accordingly, is possible only with the wrist normally extended, 
that is to say, when the flexors and extensors of the wrist are in 
a state of equilibrium. AH this is natural, since the object of move- 
ment is to enable a part of the body to reach a desired point and 
the same point may be reached by the fingers either through wrist 
extension plus abduction, or through wrist-flexion and fore-arm 
supination. Nature is not concerned particularly with the means, 
so long as the goal is reached. 

The muscles of supination are much stronger than those of prona- 
tion, a difference utilized in the direction (to the right) in which 
a screw-driver is turned. Although a movement may objectively 
appear the exact reverse of a given movement it does not foUow 
that the two are exact physiological opposites. One often involves 
greater muscular effort than the other. A conspicuous example 
of this is the difference between the power of supinating and that 
of pronatiig, just mentioned. 

Muscles in the Hand. 

The hand contains three sets of muscles ; a middle set (interossei 
and lumbricales) ; an external set (thumb muscles) forming the 
fleshy part of the base of the thumb (the thenar eminence), and 



44 PHTSIOLOaiCAL OEGAOTSM 

an internal set (fifth-finger muscles), forming the hypothenar 
eminence. The middle set is concerned with the actions of the 
fingers, the other two sets assist in “hollowing” the hand by 
bringing the thumb and fifth finger closer together. 

The basic movement of the parts of the hand is that of opposing 
the thumb to the fingers. The hand is thus divided fundamentally 
into two parts : thumb and fingers. This division is clearly illus- 
trated in the “ grasping ” reflex of the infant already mentioned. 
PianisticaUy, in a modified form, it is found in the “ passing-under- 
of-the-thumb ” in scales and arpeggios. It is quite characteristic 
of the untrained adult to play bits of pieces by “ bunching ” the 
four fingers, a further illustration of the physiological fundamentality 
of the division into fingers and thumb. 

The next finer division of the hand, separates the four fingers 
iato two groups : the second finger as one, and the third, fourth, 
and fifth fingers as the second group. This division is illustrated 
in the extension of the second finger while the others are flexed. 
Hence the name “ index ” finger. The anatomical basis for this 
separation is found in the accessory tendons (vinculae) which 
connect the third, fourth, and fifth fingers, but leave the second 
finger free. The unequal freedom of the third, fourth, and fifth 
fingers results largely from the fact that the fiitth finger action 
is materially helped by the muscles forming the hypothenar 
eminence, which re-enforce the finger flexion muscles, whereas the 
greater freedom of the third finger over the fourth results in part, 
from its freedom on the second finger side. The fourth finger, on 
the contrary, is attached on both sides. This is the characteristic 
“ weakness of the fourth finger ”, the bane of most piano students. 
The tendonous interconnections between third and fourth, and 
between fourth and fLfth fingers, account for the tendency of the 
untrained student to “ slur ” over passages involving these fimgers. 

Several characteristics of finger-motion deserve mention here. 
Since the normal fitoger-position, in regard to lateral motion 
(abduction and adduction), is parahel to the mid-line of the hand, 
abduction, a drawing apart or a spreading of the fingers, requires 
more muscular effort than adduction, a bringing-together of the 
fingers. A transition, therefore, from close to open position (diatonic 
or chromatic progressions to arpeggio), is accompanied by an increase 
of effort ; whereas the reverse transition is accompanied by a 
decrease. The practical effect of this is discussed later. 

The interossei are often treated as flexors of the hand-knuckles 
as well as of the finger-joints. This is not true, for we can flex 
(bend) the hand-knuckles and keep the fingers straight, as in the 





45 


THE MUSCLES 

characteristic position of certain forms of chronic rheumatism 
(osteoarthritis). If the same muscles performed flexion at all of 
these joints we should have the paradoxical condition of the same 
muscle being in states of relaxation and contraction at the same 
time. For a similar reason the lumbricales do not assist in flexing 
the two finger phalanges, because we can bend or straighten the 
finger-joints whether the hand-knucHes be flexed or extended. 
Flexion at the hand-kmickle is performed by the lumbricales. Thus 
two sets of muscles are involved in finger-action, one governing 
movement at the hand-knucHes (metacarpo-phalangesj joints), 
the other, movements at the finger-joints (interphalangeal joints). 
The lumbricales are the muscles chiefly concerned in rapid move- 
ments of the fingers as used in piano-playing. (Cowper, accordingly, 
named them musculi fidicunales.) 

The two sets of finger muscles : abductor-adductor set, and 
flexor-extensor set are mutually dependent, to a certain extent, 
in their actions. Thus abduction and adduction are seriously 
interfered with, in most cases they are made entirely impossible, 
with flexion at the hand-lmuckle. This has already been pointed 
out in discussing movement at the joints . The greater the extension 
at this joint, the wider the abduction, so that a spread chord cannot 
be played with the fingers in a vertical position. This is not a 
self-evident fact, for, given a different muscular-skeletal construc- 
tion at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints, the same width of stretch 
could be reached with the fingers in a vertical position, since the 
length of fingers remains the same. 

If we bend the middle finger-joint (proximal or first inter- 
phalangeal joint), the nail-joint loses its power of extension and, 
unless bent (flexed), will hang loose : a factor contributing materially 
to the “ breakmg-in ” of the nail-joints in young and inexperienced 
players. Since the same muscle (extensor communis) acts upon both 
interphalangeal joints, a separate extension of either is normally 
not possible. This condition does not apply to the thumb, for the 
extensor muscle here (longus policis) is a separate muscle, for 
each interphalangeal joint. 

A source of constant trouble to the piano teacher is the limitation 
in movement of the fourth finger. This results, primarily, from 
the presence of ligamentous bands connecting the tendon of this 
finger with that of the third and that of the fifth. These bands 
are shown in Fig. 18 C. Their position indicates that they limit 
extension of the finger, not flexion. That is, they affect finger lift, 
not the down stroke. No amount of practice can overcome entirely 
this physiological limitation. What practice does is to extend the 



46 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

band very slightly and to increase the force of the fourth finger 
stroke, thus making less hft necessary for the production of a tone 
of given intensity. The fourth finger never reaches the independence 
of the others. The followiag figures give the distances through which 
each finger, after prolonged drill in extending this range, could be 
Ufted in a particular case. The hand was held in a normal position 
for playing, and as each finger was lifted, the remaining fibagers 
remained in contact with the key surface. The distances given 
are the vertical distances between the finger-tip and the surface 
of the piano-key. 

Eight Hand : Second finger, 3-25" ; third finger, 2*80" ; fourth 
finger, 1‘60" ; fifth finger, 2-50". 

Left Hand : Second finger, 3*25" ; third filnger, 2*80" ; fourth finger, 
1*50" ; fifth finger, 2*60". 

Training thus changes the absolute amount of finger lift but 
not its relation to that of the other fibagers. 

Finally the presence of two small muscles explains the greater 
lift for the second and the fifth fingers. Each of these digits has 
an additional extensor, helping to increase its range of lift. The 
subdivisions of the hand, illustrated in Fig. 165, showing the isola- 
tion of fifth and second fingers, are thus seen to have a muscular 
cause. (The two muscles in question are the extensor indicis and 
the extensor minimi digiti,) (See Fig. 18, A, B, C, D.) 

Muscles of the Thumb. 

The movements of the thumb are performed by eight muscles, 
four of which are situated in the fore-arm and four in the thenar 
eminence. Of the four muscles m the fore-arm three are extensors, 
one for each thumb-joint. The action, however, is not entirely 
isolated. One of these extensors (longus poUicis) extends the thumb- 
tip, but if the movement be continued it acts also upon the other 
thumb-joiat. This extensor is attached to the bone differently 
from the similar tendon in the other fingers. Accordingly, the 
impossibility of extendiug the nail-joiut while flexing the other 
joints does not hold for the thumb. 

As in the case of all the muscles thus far considered, the muscles 
of the thumb show clearly the integrative action of the muscular 
system. The short extensor of the thumb, for example, ordinarily 
affects the first phalanx. As the movement increases in force 
the whole thumb is pulled back and the wrist-muscles are innervated 
to prevent the movement from spreading to the wrist. Again, 
the short flexor of the thumb not only flexes the nail-joint but also 
helps to move the entire thumb toward the little finger. And the 



THE MUSCLES 


47 


chief abductor extends the nail-joint, moves the middle phalanx 
sidewise and abducts tbe entire thumb, a combination of functions 
found also, though of opposite kmd, in the thumb-adductor. 
Tbe thumb muscles are illustrated in Fig. 18, a, 6, c, e. 

Origin and Insertion of the Muscles, 

The attachment of the muscular tendon to the rest-end is called 
the origin of the muscle, and the tendonous attachment to the 
movable bone is called the insertion. From the description of the 
muscles, their position and their action, it is obvious that between 
the origin and insertion of a muscle at least one artictilation must 
intervene. In the case of several muscles more than one joint 
intervenes. The entire problem of muscular action depends upon 
the relationship between muscle-position and joint. Accordingly, 
the question as to which end of a muscle is its origin and which its 
insertion cannot always be definitely answered until the movement 
is seen. Muscular contraction through the principle of the opposite 
equality of forces, will exert a pull on both bones to which the muscle 
is attached. The bone offering the less resistance wiU be the one to 
move. Hence origin and insertion may change places. In general, 
however, the origin of a muscle will be the end closer to the trunk. 

Conclusions 

From the analysis of muscle-position and function a number 
of conclusions may be drawn which have a direct bearing upon the 
fundamental principles of piano technique, 

(1) The simplest muscular movement involves a coordination 
of muscles. It is a muscular complex. 

The mechanical need for this was indicated in the chapter on 
Mechanics as well as in the paragraphs on skeletal articulation. To 
infer from the unity of a movement that it must be based upon a 
physiological unity of muscular action (when determined by the 
position and contraction of the various separate muscles and not 
by their coordination) is entirely wrong. The visual simplicity of 
a movement is in no way correlated with simplicity of muscular 
action. With the arm m certain positions, a simple straight-line 
movement of the hand may necessitate movement of the entice 
muscular system of the aim. 

(2) The smallest movement has some ‘‘spread”. The greater 
the extsent or the force of the movement the greater is the spread 
of muscular activity. 

Every voluntary movement made (excepting those movements 
resulting from gravity) requires some arm-position, and this, in 



48 


PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 


turn, requires its muscular “setting”. Accordingly, we cannot 
speak of a definite movement wifehout fixing both, its extent and its 
force. A pianissimo finger-stroke through two inches, is a different 
muscular reaction than the same finger-stroke producing a forte 
tone. Movement of the hand through six inches involves a different 
muscular activity than a similar movement through eighteen inches. 

(3) Equal and opposite spatial movements do not, necessarily, 
mean correspondingly equal and opposite muscular movements. 

Raising the arm requires more effort than lowering it, on account 
of the action of gravity ; fore-arm supination covers a wider force- 
range than fore-arm pronation, because the supinators are more 
powerful than the pronators. Finger adduction is easier than 
finger abduction because the fully adducted position (fingers side 
by side) is the position of normal rest. We may also conclude, 
conversely, that equal muscular effort may therefore produce 
unequal forces. 

(4) The size and strength of a muscle depends upon its function ; 
that is to say, upon the size, weight, and position of the parts of the 
body that it moves. 

The most powerful muscles of the upper limb are accordingly 
found in the back and in the chest ; the next most powerful 
in the shoulder ; then in the upper arm, fore-arm, and finally, the 
weakest, in the hand. 

(6) The more extended or forceful a movement is, the more 
necessary is the activity of large muscles. 

This is a corollary to the second conclusion on the “ spread ” 
of muscular activity. In an extended movement, whether of little 
or great force, large amplitude must be covered, which depends 
upon the movements of the large anatomical appendages (whole 
arm or fore-arm) and hence also upon the use of large muscles. 
In a forceful movement, whether of little or great amplitude, suflGl- 
cient rigidity must be present to permit the necessary joints to 
act as fixed fulcra ; hence, here too, the large muscles will be needed. 

(6) Absence of motion does not necessarily mean absence of 
muscular activity. 

Two equal forces acting in opposite directions upon the same point 
will not produce motion at this point, but the forces will none the 
less be acting. So, antagonistic muscular groups can act equally 
upon a joint, setting the joint in a fixed position but not producing 
motion at the joint. (Mechanical Principle, 4.) 

(7) No muscle is limited to the production of a single movement. 
It has a primary function, and always secondary or tertiary 
functions. 



THE MUSCLES 


49 


Each muscle is the chief factor in a certain type of movement, 
but as this type gradually changes iuto other types the muscle 
continues to act in a continuously decreasing degree. 

(8) Many movements of translation are produced by movements 
of rotation. The hand may move in a horizontal plane by rotation 
of the upper arm. The straight finger-stroke may result from 
rotation (fleson) in the hand-knucHe combined with opposite 
rotation (extension) at the interphalangeal joints. 


1 



CHAPTER IV 

States and Propeeties oe Muscles 
A MUSCLE is a complex organ consisting of striped muscular tissue, 
some connective tissue, many blood-vessels, and nerve fibres. 
Surrounding eacb so-called muscle is a covering of sbiny connective 
tissue, from which layers extend inward through the muscle dividing 
it into muscular bundles. These are in turn further subdivided, 
so that a cross-section of the belly of a muscle gives the appearance 
of a cellular structure, the celk being filled with the muscular 
substance. 

The fibres of the muscle vary greatly in both length and thickness, 
in length from a small part of an inch to somewhat more than an 
inch; in thickness, according to reliable authorities, from one 
four-hundredth to one seven-hundredth of an inch. Each of 
these fibres, which form the real muscular substance, is enclosed 
in a tissue. The function of the latter is to enable the contractility 
of the muscular substance, which is itself quite soft, to act at the 
points of insertion, thus producing the desired movement ; for 
the tissue, unlike the muscle fibre which it encloses, is neither 
extensible nor contractible. When a muscle contracts, therefore, 
it is the result of the contraction of the thousands of its muscle 
fibres ; and when movement takes place, this results from the trans- 
mission of this contraction to the connective tissues enclosing the 
fibres, and through these and the tendons to the points where the 
tendons are attached to the bones. 

Contradility. 

The most important property of muscle is its contractility. When 
appropriately stimulated, the muscle fibres contract and pull 
upon the inelastic tissues surrounding them. It is customary 
to divide muscular contraction into two t3q)es : a single, momentary 
contraction, known as a twitch ”, which is always involuntary, 
and a more or less sustained contraction, known as ‘‘ tetanus ”. 
In all voluntary movements the reaction, no matter how diort, 
is tetanic in character. It is not produced by a single momentary 
stimulus but by a series of such stimuli. Since piano-playing is 
concerned entirely with voluntary movements or movements that 
were voluntary before repetition relegated them to the reflex 
field, the analysis of the simple twitch contraction need be 
but briefly treated. 


60 



STATES AND PEOPEETIES OP MUSCLES 61 

In neural stimulation the impulses reach the muscle fibres at 
intervals shorter than the time needed for the muscle to return to 
its original state. As a result, summation of contraction takes 
place. The chief characteristic of this summation is that it exceeds 
the maximum contraction possible with a single stimulation. Its 
greater duration of contraction is obvious, since the movement is 
the response to a series of successive stimuli. 

The contractility of a muscle varies further with the intensity 
of the stimulus. A very weak stimulus may be insufficient to produce 
any movement. As the intensity of the stimulus increases a point 
will be reached at which slight contractions occur. A further 
increase in intensity will result in an increase in contraction. In 
voluntary movement it is difficult to reach a complete maximum 
because the nature of the stimulus is psychological, and depends 
upon such unstable factors as the will, besides being dependent 
upon circulation and respiration. 

Muscular Action 
Simple Contraction (Twitch). 

The simple innervation of a muscle results in an activity which 
may be divided into three parts : latent period, period of contraction, 
and period of relaxation. A muscle, scientifically speaking, does not 
contract simultaneously with the stimulations, but about one- 
hundredth of a second after stimulation. This latent period, however, 
is, for our purposes, negligible, the time involved, even if it were 
considerably longer, being well below any time-value used in piano- 
plajing. The periods of contraction and relaxation vary greatly 
wiiii the condition of the muscle and the particular muscle used. 
A fixed time for all muscles cannot therefore be given, although 
normally both phases occur in a very small part of a second. Any 
twitch, however, takes less time than any isolated or repeated 
movement demanded by piano-technique. Consequently, the 
contractile speed of a muscle, or more accurately, the lack of it, 
cannot account for any difficulties in muscular action as applied 
to the piano. Normal muscle can contract and relax with sufficient 
speed to meet any needs of the pianist. In a simple contraction, 
generally termed “ twitch a muscle does not shorten more than 
one-fourth of its total length. 

Complex Sustained Contraction. 

The muscular “twitch” just described plays an insignificant 
part in the voluntary action of muscles. Its physiology has largely 
been determined by the electrical stimulation method on the excised 
muscle. 



52 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 

If, instead of a single stimulus, a series of stimuli in rapid 
succession be used, so that the second stimulus arrives before the 
effect of the jBrst stimulus has worn off, we get, instead of a series 
of separate contractions, a sustained contraction known as physio- 
logical tetanus. The muscle remains contracted and shows a 
condition which we should expect if the stimulus were continuous. 
Moreover, in tetanus, the muscle shows a greater degree of contrac- 
tion, a more powerful contraction, than in simple stimulation. 
This is but another example of the principle of summation of 
stimuli. 

All voluntary movement is tetanic in character. The very 
shortest voluntary contraction is not induced by a single neural 
impulse, but a rapid series of such impulses. This is a fundamental 
characteristic of the neural current. The resulting action of the 
muscle, therefore, though in appearance a single unit of move- 
ment, results from the application of a series of stimuli. The shortest 
staccatissimo is not an exception. The reason for this speed of 
neural stimulation is found in the rate of the motor nerve, which 
has its own speed of neural discharge. Since this rate is physio- 
logically predetermined and beyond our control, the fact that every 
voluntary or habitual movement is tetanic has no further direct 
bearing upon our problem. 

Degrees of Contraction. 

A contraction may be the result of either of two muscular 
conditions : first, all the muscle fibres may contract to a moderate 
degree, producing, by their summation, a force effect; secondly, 
some of the fibres may contract strongly, and the others remain 
passive, produciug the same force effect. The former view would 
demand a nerve impulse to the muscle as a whole ; a form of mass- 
action rather at variance with the essentially integrative action of 
the organism. In support of this view is the evidence produced 
by experiment upon the excised hviag muscle of the cold-blooded 
animals. In these cases the degree of contraction of the muscle 
depends upon the intensity of the stimulus, an increase in the 
stimulus producing an increase in contraction up to a point beyond 
which the muscle does not contract. Since the electric current used 
for stimulation may reasonably be supposed to traverse the entire 
muscle regardless of the intensity of the current, this phenomenon 
of graded response supports the first view that in any muscular 
contraction all the fibres are contracted, their degrees of contraction 
varying with the stimulus. 

A second, somewhat more promising view, holds that as the 



STATES AND PEOPEETIES OP MUSCLES 53 

stiraulus increases in intensity new fibres are added to those already 
functioning, thus changing the total response without changing 
the response of the original fibres. This view, of course, is in close 
agreement with the commonly observed “spread’’ of muscular 
activity with an increase in the stimulus. It seems probable, 
therefore, that both reactions actually occur in any movement 
of sufficient variation. E35)erimentation upon the excised muscle 
has shown that a single muscle can give graded reactions. When 
such a muscle is attached to a complex leverage system, like that 
of the arm, any variation in the force-effect of its contraction will 
be communicated to its origin, upon which this force wiU work. 
Accordingly, the muscles controlling the point of origin will have 
to contract in proportion to this increase in force, and the muscular 
spread is the result. 

This leaves the graded response within a single muscle to be 
explained. Do all the fibres contract in response to every stimulus, 
varying in their degree of response, or does the number of reacting 
fibres increase with an increase in the stimulus ? 

Exercise does not increase the number of muscle-fibres, but 
increases the size or growth of the fibres themselves. That is to say, 
a muscle grows, gets stronger, not by the addition of fibres to others, 
already present, but by an increase in the size of the existing fibres. 
This points to a physiological unity of muscle which would support 
the total reaction theory. The presence of a nerve fibre for each 
muscle fibre is itself not decisive in either way. Such an arrange- 
ment would be as useful for total response as for partial response. 
The question cannot, at present, be answered definitely, facts being 
deducible in support of either theory. 

Graded Response. 

Be that as it may, the piano teacher need not wait for its solution. 
For him, the important phase of muscular contraction is that 
graded reaction actually exists, and that the degree of response 
varies directly with the intensity of the stimulus. We know, 
definitely, that graded response is possible either by gradations 
in the reaction of a single muscle or by a coordination between 
muscles. 

In the chapter on Mechanical Principles, a force was shown 
to depend upon the speed and the mass of the moving body. So 
long as the number of muscles acting at any one tine remains a 
constant (these, with the weight of the moving part constitute 
the mass), variations in force can result only from variations in 
speed or acceleration, since the force equals the product of the mass 
and the acceleration. Accordingly, i£ an increase in the force of 



54 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGAMSM 

a movement be desired wittont changiii^ the extent or spread of 
the movement, the speed of the moving body must be increased. 
And conversely, with the same speed, the same muscle can only 
produce one degree of force. 

A second factor in grading muscular response is the form or shape 
of the muscle itself. The force which a muscle exerts is the result 
of the size and the number of its fibres ; the distance through which 
the muscle contracts is the result of the length of the fibres. Its 
force is measured by its cross-section. When the distance through 
which the muscle acts is a constant, the amount of work done, 
that is to say, the force of the contraction, is determined by the 
thickness of the muscle, thickness being the dimension at r%ht 
angles to the direction of the tissues and fibres. Wken force is 
constant, the distance through which the muscle can move a body 
^ depends upon the length of the muscle. Short thick muscles function 
best for short, powerful, movements ; long, thin muscles, for less 
powerful, more extended movements. 

When both an extended and powerful movement is executed, 
this demands a coordination of muscular action in which each 
muscle contributes its effiLciency to the efficiency of the whole move- 
ment. This is discussed in detail under Coordination. It follows, 
if a short, powerful movement be desired, that muscles must be 
innervated to augment the thickness suiOGlciently ; or else that 
certain other muscles, themselves thick, must be used. A movement, 
therefore, made slowly and then made rapidly, cannot involve 
the same muscular response, since greater force is required for the 
greater speed. 

Thus, apart from effects of temporary and permanent physio- 
logical condition, the strength of a muscle depends upon the size 
•^of its cross-section. A thick muscle is more powerful than a thin 
one, other things equal. The extent or range through which a 
muscle acts depends upon the length of the muscle, greater length 
naturally permitting more extensive contraction. A powerful 
muscle thus has a wider range of gradation than a weak muscle, 
because it may continue to function when the weaker muscle 
has already used all its force. The question now suggests itself ; 
To what extent are powerful muscles desirable in piano-playing ? 

Any increase in dynamic range of action is desirable because it 
gives the player command over a greater variety of technical 
response. Not only does the muscle itself permit this increase, 
but the possible combinations with other muscles are likewise 
mcreased. Experiment has shown, generally, that a muscle does 
its best work with relatively light loads, although some investigators 



STATES AND PEOPERTIES OE MUSCLES 66 

have found mamnum ejBiciency at half the muinrYM im load. 
Accordingly, a work of eight units is to be done, a muscle capable 
of twenty units, will do the required work with greater ease and 
less fatigue than a muscle whose mamnum power is ten units. 
An increase in power is not, in itself, accompanied by loss of 
sensitivity to fine adjustments. The fact that the latter frequently 
accompanies the former results from the increase in tension which 
heavy work necessarily requires and from the added flesh resistance 
which accompanies muscular growth. The more powerfully we 
play, the greater must the articidar tension be in order to meet 
the increased resistance. But tension, as we shall see, precludes 
accurate judgment of resistance, and, upon such judgment, all 
tonal effects on the piano depend. Mere increase in muscular 
strength, therefore, has its undesirable as well as desirable results, 
so far as its application to piano-playing is concerned. Only when 
the increase in strength reaches a point at which, for the reasons 
given, it interferes with flexibility and finer adjustment, does it 
become undesirable. The normal pupil seldom reaches this point. 
A few illustrations will make this clear. A composition such as 
the Liszt B-minor Sonata, apart from any technical demand of 
dexterity, requires a considerable output of pure physical force. 
If the player possesses sufficient strength in fingers and arms, 
he can distribute this in any of several economic ways. The player 
with weak fingers and arms, on the contrary, will have to be satisfied 
either with less pronounced dynamic effects, or with the utilization 
of the shoulder and back muscles, a coordination that does not always 
facilitate the technical demands of the particular passage. 

Similar conditions hold for compositions demanding sustained 
finger-work. If the fingers be sufficiently strong, the required 
dynamic gradations may be made without calling into play the 
larger muscle-groups of the arm. In passages in which held. notes 
against triU figures make arm-movement awkward, if not impossible, 
sufficient finger-strength is absolutely necessary, particularly 
if dynamic gradation be desired. In this connection a spread to 
the arm is often considered poor coordination, something to be 
avoided. But is not the spread nature’s device for reenforcing 
the fatigued finger muscles with the ann muscles ? At least, we 
never meet this muscular “spread” in similar short passages, 
or in strong fingers, where in both cases it would be reasonable 
to expect it, were mere incorrect coordination the cause. 

Muscular Work. 

The mechanical principle of work states that the work done equals 
the product of the force and the amount of displacement. Applied 



56 PHYSIOLOGICAL OKGANISM 

to the muscles this equals the force of contraction and the longi- 
tudinal extent of contraction. Since the force with which a muscle 
contracts depends upon the thickness and the number of its fibres 
and the distance through which the muscle contracts depends upon 
the length of its fibres, there is no constant for the force effects. 
For the extent of contraction it is safe to say that a healthy 
muscle fibre can contract to one-half its original length. 

Two muscles of radically different sizes can thus perform equal 
amounts of work, though they do not do this in the same way. 
Suppose the force exerted by a thick muscle to be 10 lbs. and of a 
thinner muscle, 6 lbs. If the thicker muscle lifts a weight through 
2 in. and the thinner muscle fifts it through 4 in., they will have 
done equal amounts of work : 20 work units each. 

Temperatwe, 

The eflffciency of muscular action is also affected by temperature. 
In the warm-blooded anhnals temperature effects are minimal 
since the bodily temperature, regardless of that of the surroundmg 
media, is practically a constant. None the less, the piano teacher 
is frequently confronted with conditions produced by temperature 
deviations. The general stiffness of the early morning pupil, 
the cold, perspiring hands of the anemic one, are examples of the 
temperature effects of poor circulation at the extremities of the 
body. Since this is essentially a circulatory problem, it will be 
discussed in Chapter V. 

I FaMgue. 

The earliest onset of muscular fatigue affects the relaxation, 
not contraction rate of the muscle. The muscle fails to relax as 
rapidly as at first, with the result that the second stimulus may 
come before the effect of the first stimulus has been neutralized. 
The next effect of fatigue shows in the degree of contraction. The 
muscle contracts less and less to a stimulus of uniform intensity, 
which, if sufiSciently prolonged, will finally result in absence of any 
contraction. 

Muscular fatigue is a chemical process, an accumulation of waste 
products (carbon dioxide, lactic acid, and others) in the muscle. 
The removal of these is normally done by the circulation. When 
the accumulation of waste products exceeds the rate of their removal 
and the rate of replenishing with ejB&cient substances, fatigue sets 
/ in. If, before complete fatigue, a short rest period is allowed, 
v^the muscle shows a rapid recovery, since the waste products can 
be removed quickly, once activity ceases. However, if forced con- 
' traction be resorted to, when a muscle is already well fatigued, 



^ STATES AND PROPEETIES OP MUSCLES 57 

a mucli longer period of rest is needed for it to regain its contrac: 
"" tility. Muscular action, therefore, should not be carried on after 
moderate fatigue is present. 

In spite of popular opinion to the contrary, experiment has 
shown that fatigue in one set of muscles decreases the energy 
output of other sets. The flow of blood with its fatigue products 
accounts for this. Accordingly, the most efficient muscular activity 
is the first activity preceded by a moderate “ warming-up ” after 
relatively complete muscular rest. When we change from one 
hand to the other in piano practice, without complete rest periods, 
each successive attempt is muscularly less efficient. This, of course, 
is to be understood strictly physiologically. Improvement of 
coordination resulting throng practice, readily outwei^s the 
sHght loss, if any, of muscular contractility. Moreover, unless 
the rate of muscular stimulation exceeds the rate of waste-product 
removal, no fatigue is present. In normal piano practice, the 
pupil not only does not exceed the muscular fatigue limit, but 
probably never even reaches it. 

Sensations of fatigue are localized in the region of the affected 
muscles, not in the joints. The location of the fatigue sensations 
is thus an index to the muscle that has been active. A pupil with 
whom I was working for arm-relaxation, complained of fatigue in 
the deltoid muscle. Nothing in the outward movement of the arm 
had caused me to suspect arm-abduction. Once, however, this 
antagonistic muscular activity was revealed, she had no difficulty 
in relaxing. It is pedagogically advisable that each teacher become 
personally acquainted with the sensations resulting from muscular 
fatigue. This may be done in various ways. Prolonged activity 
in any unusual form, bowling or tennis, is a good example and 
will rapidly produce fatigue. If an ergograph is available, fatigue 
of any finger muscle can readily be recorded as well as felt. The 
sensation of fatigue, as we should eaqpect, is not a sharp pain, but 
rather flat or diffused. It is, in consequence, often localized with 
difficulty by the young pupil who describes it as ‘‘ just generally 
tired ”, “ feel it in my whole arm ”, “ can’t say just where it is.” 


RiajMty. 

^Physiological rigidity may be divided into two classes : that 
resulting from excess lactic acid production, the most marked 
instance of which is rigor mortis, and that resulting from simul- 
taneous contraction of antagonistic muscle groups. In discussiug 
joints and muscles we learned that most movements, at least in 
their component parts, involved the activity of opposite muscle- 



68 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 

groups, one of whicli contracted while tlie other relaxed- We know 
that, normally, with every impulse to a flexor to contract, goes 
an impulse to the corresponding extensor to relax. That is io say, 
such is the case if movement (in this case flexion) at the joint 
be desired. But if movement at a more distal joint be desired, or 
some other powerful resistance is to be overcome, flexors and 
extensors are simultaneously contracted, thus setting the joint 
firmly against movement, and enabling it to act as a necessary 
fiixed fulcrum. The degree of rigidity depends upon the degree 
of simultaneous contraction. Mechanically, the articular surfaces 
of the joint are firmly pressed together because the simultaneous 
puU of the muscle tendons forces the distal surface firmly against 
the proximal surface. 

Such a condition, since it is necessary in some degree at all joints 
in order for any movement to occur, involves no undue or unnatural 
strain upon the organism or any of its parts. If the back of the 
hand were not held fixied (by appropriate fixation of the wrist) 
as the fibnger-tip strikes the piano-key the hand-knuckle would 
be pushed up. In order to permit maximum functioning of the 
fibnger-tip, the knuckle must remain fixed during the movement. 
This rigiity, since it is constantly in operation in all movements, 
is not felt as rigidity or stiflmess, because its degree is favourable 
for the proper execution of the movement and hence aids, instead 
of interferes with, the coordination. Only when rigidity reaches 
an unnecessary degree, or when it is unnecessarily present in some 
joint not acting as a transmission-point for the force, does it constitute 
what the piano teacher calls ‘‘ stiffness ”. If the tension in a joint 
exceeds the amount of resistance which the movement is to -over- 
come, this excess is wasted effort and serves no physiological 
purpose. Unless extreme, it will not make itself quickly felt, 
nor will it seriously interfere with the execution of the movement 
so far as this merely overcomes a resistance. On the other hand, 
if the rigidity is present in a joint where movement would facilitate 
the total action, the condition seriously interferes with the ease, 
accuracy, and speed of the movement. It interposes an additional, 
often very considerable resistance, which hastens the onset of fatigue 
and often directly interferes with the proper movements in related 
parts. Since, however, the eflfi.cient amount of work done by any 
muscle is not increased, the fatigue, or more accurately strain, 
is not a condition in the muscle, but in the joint, where the simul- 
taneous contraction of the antagonistic muscles exerts supernormal 
pressure between the two articular surfaces. Sensations of strain 
or rigidity, therefore, are referred to the joints. The joints cannot 



STATES AND PEOPERTIES OP MUSCLES 69 

fatigue in the sense of the muscles, because there is no organ at 
the joint for activating work, Patigue sensations localized in the 
joints result not from muscular fatigue but from inappropriate 
joint-rigidity. They are always, with a few exceptions in extreme 
performances, undesirable in piano-playing because they tend 
to destroy the correctness of the movement as a whole, and because 
they make judgments on extent, degree, and direction of move- 
ment more difficult. 

Musch-Tom. 

Between the finer fibrils of the muscle fibres are minute spaces 
filled with a semi-fl.uid substance called sarcoplasm. The actual 
muscular movements are made by the fibres, the changes in the 
general condition or tone ” of the muscle, as it is called, are 
generally attributed to the sarcoplasm. Inability to write smoothly 
after a hard set of tennis or other muscular exercise, inability to 
prevent excessive movements after an hour of strenuous physical 
culture, and the tenseness of the muscles as a result of emotional 
excitement, are generally considered examples of changes m muscular 
tone. Paderewski’s signature after a strenuous programme 
illustrates the effect. A distinction should be made here, however, 
in the last-named instance. If the tenseness is present during the 
emotional excitement it is probably a real muscular contraction, 
a reflex resulting in a heightened efficiency to respond to any sudden 
stimulus. It puts the person on the ‘‘ qui vive It is only in- 
dicectly, therefore, a change in muscular tone. If the tenseness 
in the muscles persists, or if its reverse, a hyper-relaxation, sets in 
after the excitement has passed, the condition does show a change 
in muscular tone. 

Since, however, the tenseness during excitement is uniformly 
a reflex, it has been customary to speak of this tenseness as heightened 
muscular tone. On this basis muscular tone is greatest during 
any form of strenuous exercise or intense emotional strain, it is 
less during periods of relative inactivity, and it is least during 
sleep or the influence o| anesthetics. The close relationship between 
what is called ‘‘ to^^’ and the property of relaxation wUl become 
evident with|^he.^flalysis of relaxation. 

Relaxation, % 

The salient f^ure of modern piano pedagogy is the stress placed 
upon relaxations As a result of wide-spread use of this term not 
a few discrepancies and misconceptions have arisen. These make 
necessary a detailed analysis of this property of muscles. 

For the sake of clearness, I shall for the present exclude the 



60 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 

influence of nersre impulse upon muscular condition, and treat the 
muscles as physiologic entities. This is, of course, not the condition 
under which they operate in life, but it at least will permit a clear 
exposition of the state of relaxation. The effect of the nerve impulses 
upon this state will then be treated under Coordination and 
Incoordination. 

The property of muscle-tone exerts a force at each joint relatively 
constant for each muscle or group of muscles. Accordingly, a 
completely “ relaxed ” joint does not exist anywhere in the human 
body. I use ‘‘ relaxed ’’ here in the sense of zero resistance. No 
two bones, during life, normally rest loosely upon each other at 
a joint ; there is always pressure of one articulating surface upon 
the other. Since this, in a degree varying with the growth of the 
organism, has been present in all joints from birth, we are not aware 
of this force or of its effects, and what the mind considers complete 
relaxation, in the absence of any sensation to the contrary, is 
not complete physical or physiological relaxation. 

This normal joint-resistance, instead of a zero-point, must form 
the basis of an analysis of relaxation. We begin, not with a flabby 
muscle, but with muscles possessing a certain puU. For the sake 
of simplicity a hinge-joint with two antagonistic muscles may 
serve as the iBrst illustration. Suppose the normal muscle-tone 
at the joint to be 100 force-units, the actual force value in ounces 
or pounds being of no consequence m an exposition of the principle 
involved. Such a joint will be relaxed so long as this norm is not 
exceeded. If either muscle, or both muscles should relax to a 
point where their summated pull is below this norm, a condition 
of “ looseness ” at the joint results, the bones now being held in 
place more by atmospheric pressure, by the fleshy parts surrounding 
the joint, and by the formation of the bony surfaces. In such a 
condition, for example, the head of the humerus can be pulled out 
(by external force) over an inch from its socket m the shoulder. 
If both muscles now contract beyond the normal tone-state, the 
pressure at the joint will exceed 100 force-units and the condition 
of stiffness ” results. (It is necessary to point out here that 
although we speak of a stiff” or “relaxed” joint, in reality 
it is the muscles controlling movement at the joint that cause the 
stiffness or relaxation at the joint itself.) 

These conditions or variations in resistance are adequately 
studied by the action of the apparatus represented in Fig. 10. 
This consists of three scales, one opposed to the other two, in order 
to register the pressure upon them as the pull of the other forces 
increases or diminishes. The levers represent the bones, m, the 



61 


STATES AND PROPERTIES OF MUSCLES 

joint, the balances B and C represent the muscles, and the strings 
leading from the scales to the points of insertion represent the 
inelastic tendons. The puU of the two balances may be considered 

A 



B C 


Fig. 19. 

the normal muscular tone and this will register on A. Suppose 
each muscle to exert a force of 50 ; then, in a movement, perfect, 
not complete or zero relaxation, occurs if, when muscle B exerts 
a force of 51, muscle C exerts a force of 49 ; when B pulls with 60, 
C pulls with 40. In other words one muscle relaxes at precisely 
the rate at which the antagonistic muscle contracts. As a result 
no work is wasted, m remains stationary, and the contracting muscle 
does its work with no more than the normal joint-resistance. By 
moving B and C in opposite directions, keeping the registration 
on aU three balances stationary, the ease of a relaxed movement 
is readily felt by the person moving the balances. 



62 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGANISM 

Now suppose muscle B to relax at a rate greater than the 
contracting rate of muscle C, so that, for example, B exerts a 
force of 30 when C exerts a force of 60. The total joint pressure 
is now 10 below normal, resulting in a small degree of looseness ”, 
with its consequent impairing of accurate control, and balance A 
will record the drop in tonus as m ascends. Such a condition is 
found in the high degrees of bodily relaxation, as in sleep. If, 
in a waking condition, we are asked to respond to a stimulus, we 
do so with a muscular reaction much greater than that necessary 
for an adequate reaction. This excess results from the lack of 
control over movement when the joints are in a state of hyper- 
relaxation. This condition, therefore, is not the most desirable 
one for voluntary movement. It is useful for emphasizing the feeling 
of relaxation in certain subjects, but it is never used in actual 
piano-playing, in spite of the wide-spread notion that it is so used. 
Illustrations of its presence are found in the passively swinging, 
pendular arm while walking, and in the dangling hand while resting 
the arm on a table or on the side of a chair. There is, in these cases, 
a certain amount of slack ” to be taken up before the normal 
resistance is reached, upon which the adequate control of movement 
depends. A helpful analogy to the physiological state of hyper- 
relaxation is found in any system of compound levers permitting 
“play” at each joint, as a result of which accurate operation 
cannot begin until this play has been overcome. Such a mechanical 
scheme is obviously not adapted to accuracy or speed. 

The third typical muscular state is that of hypo-relaxation. It 
results when one muscle relaxes at a slower rate than that at which 
the other muscle contracts. Beginning again at the normal tension 
of 60 for both muscles B and C, if B increases its pull to 70 and C 
relaxes to 40 instead of to 30, we have a plus resistance of 10, which 
interferes with the freedom and maximal eificiency of the move- 
ment, and m will move down, registering this plus resistance on A. 
This condition is popularly termed stiffness or rigidity, and its 
eradication forms one. of the most important problems m piano 
pedago^. A similar, although not entirely parallel, instance in 
mechanics is the operation of any rusty or non-oiled hinge. Much 
more force is required for the desired movement than that used when 
the friction between the parts is reduced by cleaning and lubricatiag. 
The added resistance can be felt when the balances of Kg. 19 are 
so moved. 

The classification of the relaxation states into hyper-, normla, 
and hypo-relaxation shares the disadvantage common to all similar 
classifications. This is their failure to indicate the many inter- 



STATES AM) PEOPEETIES OP MUSCLES 63 

mediate states, in consequence of wMcL. any one state may be made 
to grade by imperceptible plus or minus increments, into tbe next 
state. Thus if normal relaxation is at a combined tension of 100, 
distributed for muscles A and B at 60 each, tben a contraction of 
A to a tension of 60 and a relaxation of B to 41 adds but one one- 
hundredth to the normal tension. If B relaxes to 42 the hyper- 
tension is two. A movement in this condition is quantitatively 
practicallynormal relaxation. Accordingly, the degrees of relasition 
are not marked off by clearly defined types, but may shade by 
contmuous transition from an approximate zero to an approximate 
hundred per cent relaxation. 

The illustration given, lunitmg the muscular action to two 
muscles with equal normal pull cannot be applied in this simple 
form to any complex movement. As we have seen, even the 
smallest bodily movement is a muscular complex, involving 
movement or tension at more than one joint, and muscles 
at various and varying tensions. This complexity, however, does 
not create any new principle of reaction, but merely extend the 
simple mechanical principle that we have considered to several 
muscles and joints in simultaneous operation. When such an action 
takes place without unnecessary friction, and maximal efidciency, 
it is spoken of not as a relaxed movement (although this term is 
applicable), but as a coordinated movement ; and when excessive 
friction or looseness interferes with the efficiency of the movement, 
it is said to be incoordinated. 



CHAPTEK V 

The Neural and Circulatory Systems 
Neural System. 

In combirdng tlie two remaming systems that make up the physio- 
logical organism there is danger that their importance, particularly 
that of the nervous system, may be underestimated. In piano- 
playing the whole learning and playing process is inseparably 
bound up with nerves and their centres : the spinal cord and the 
brain. But the study of these phases is primarily a psychological 
problem, and I wish, so far as possible, to limit the present investiga- 
tion to the mechanical and physiological fields, particularly the 
muscular fields. Accordingly, a brief exposition of the various parts 
of the nervous and circulatory systems, and of their principles 
of operation, must suflGlce. 

The functional unit of the nervous system is the nerve cell or 
neuron. Of this there are three kinds : sensory, motor, and inter- 
calated. The sensory cells bring the neural impulses in from the 
sense organs, the motor neurons carry the impulses out to the muscles, 
and the intercalated cells join, in a very elaborate scheme, the cells 
of the other two groups. The three groups are also called receptors, 
effectors, and conductors, respectively. Thus we have the three 
Vfundamental requirements of a nervous system : a means for 
. registering impressions from the outside world, a means for con- 
ducting, transforming, storing, and elaborating them, and a means 
^for expressing through movement, these impressions, memories, 
vand elaborations. 

The spinal cord has, as one of its chief functions, the care of reflex 
action. By reflex action is meant a response of the organism not 
involving consciousness or the interposition of a brain. Moreover, 
since the efficiency of reflex action depends upon speed, it is not 
surprising to find sensory and motor paths, which lead to the same 
bodily region, entering and leaving the spinal cord in close proximity 
to each other. This topographical relationship applies to the general 
regions also : the centres for foot and leg are in the lower region 
of the spiual cord, those for hands and arms in the upper region. 

^ The second function of the spinal cord is its connection with the 
brain, as a result of which volition can at any time stop the reflexes 
or modify them . But more important still is the fact that by repetition 

64 



THE NEUEAL AMD CmCULATORT SYSTEMS 66 

of voluntary movement, which, must always begin under direct 
brain control (if pupils only realized this in early stages of practice !), 
the brain is needed less and less until, finally, it is relieved of all 
participation and we have what is blown as an acquired reflex, 
^the work of the spinal centres. 

In thus speaking of nerves entering and leaving the cord one 
must not think of a small number. Ingbert counted approximately 
six hxmdred and fifty thousand fibres, in the dorsal roots entering 
one side of the spinal cord. The diameter of these fibres varies ; 
the thickest does not exceed one two-thousandth of an inch. 

The brain itself is, for the psychologist, the most interesting 
part of the nervous system. Of its five parts the cerebrum and the 
cerebellum are the most important for our purposes, since it is these 
parts that are chiefly concerned with learning in all its forms. The 
jcerebellum, or smaU-brain, acts as a refiexcentre for posture, muscular 
tensions, movements and external strains. To these belong the 
sensory impulses arising in a muscle when it contracts passively 
as a result of the action of external forces. Injury to the cerebellum 
is similar to injury to the semi-circular canals of the ear ; both are 
followed by loss of sustained posture and muscle tonus. 

These vsirious parts of the nervous system are connected in many 
ways by the nerves of popular terminology. In the case of the arms, 
the sensory pathways enter the spinal cord by the dorsal roots, 
some passmg directly to the ventral horn, others continuing up 
through the cord to the bulb (base of the brain), thence to 
the thalamus, where new cells arise and lead to the cortex of the 
cerebellum. Thus at least three sets of fibres -must Ke innervated 
before a sensory impression from the arms (legs or trunk likewise) 
can reach the brain proper. 

Similar conditions exist for the ear and the eye. These, with tte 
hands and arins. form the working material of the pianist. The 
motor tract in turn leads from the motor area of the cortex to the 
muscles, by way of the bulb and spinal cord. In the latter the 
fibres connect with the motor cells which carry the impulses to the 
muscles. This is the outgoing phase of the mechanism of voluntary 
movement. The inter-connections of the motor tract point to a 
close association with the purely reflex arcs. This is to be expected, 
for in most, if not in all voluntary movements, reflex elements are 
present. 

All this specialization of functions which we have just considered 
would serve no biological value if it were lost entirely upon reaching 
the brain. And, as a matter of fact, it is not lost. The cerebr^ 
itself, although in external appearance a well-defined anatomical 



66 PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 

unit, is subdivided into areas specifically connected with, and 
reacting to definite sense departments. Thus we speak of a motor 
area, auditory area, visual area, and others. This is not supposition, 
nor has it anything to do with phrenology. Evidence is furnished 
by direct experimentation (not only in the lower animals and 
anthropoid apes, but also on man), by human pathology and by 
comparative anatomy. When certain areas of the brain are directly 
stimulated, sensations and movements result, corresponding to 
the area stimulated, and these responses are absent if other areas 
are stimulated. Disease in a certain area will result in loss of 
sensation or movement for that field, a loss that extends even to 
memories and ideations. Finally, comparative anatomy shows that 
high development in any capacity is accompanied by high develop- 
ment in the corresponding cortical area. This, however, is some- 
thing far different from the knowledge bumps of the phrenologists. 

The various sensory areas and the motor area do not, however, 
make up the entire cortex of the cerebrum. Coimecting these areas 
are others, generally termed the “ silent ’’ or “ association ” areas 
of Flechsig. Their function seems to be connection among the 
various sensory areas, and between these and the motor area. 

Every sense department, accordingly, is brought into more or 
less direct contact with every other department. The silent reading 
of the word “ orange ” may initiate the speech muscles into saying 
the word ; may recall the visual image ; may call np the aroma 
(olfactory stimulation), and the taste (gustatory stimulation) ; may 
arouse the ‘‘ feel ” of the fruit (cutaneous) ; its weight (muscular) ; 
finally, even the sound of the spoken word (auditory). If it were 
not for the association fibres, such a response would be impossible. 

Int^rati/oe Action. 

The arrangement of such a system is obviously integrated or 
coordinated action. No part does any work without at least the 
possibility of affecting all other parts. Even the acquisition of a 
highly specialized reaction is largely the exclusion of other co- 
related reactions which would be possible on account of the inter- 
relations among the parts. The higher the specialization, the finer 
were the associations that made it possible. Thus the nervous 
system, like the skeletal structure and the muscles, is fundamentally 
opposed to fixed, isolated response, and represents, instead, the 
highest type of adaptation or changing response. 

Ciradatory System. 

The effects of the circulation upon piano technique are some- 
what less important than those of muscular construction and function 



THE NEURAL AND CIRCULATORY SYSTEMS 67 

which, we have considered. The efEects, however, are of sufficient 
frequency and range to warrant an inclusion, at this point, of a 
brief survey of this fourth part of the human organism. 

The Blood-Vessels, 

The blood-supply for the arm is furnished by an intricate system 
of blood-vessels, with the axillary artery, situated in the shoulder 
region, for their fundamental source. This artery has six branches, 
each of which again subdivides into smaller arteries. The main 
artery of the upper arm is the brachial artery which runs along 
the inner side of the arm. It gives off five branches, some leading 
to the muscles and others, the nutrient, to the tissues. Immediately 
below the elbow this artery divides into two branches, the radial 
and the ulnar, extending along the similarly named bones. Branches 
from these arteries feed the muscles of the fore-arm. After various 
divisions one branch of the radial artery, after passing under the 
muscles of the thumb, unites with the deep branch of the ulnar 
artery. From this point arise the smaller arteries of the hand and 
fingers, the arterioles, and, finally, the capillaries. 

In general, paralleling this system of arteries is the venal system 
carrying the blood back to the larger veins and thence to the heart. 
At the points where this transfer is made are the capillaries, myriads 
of fine, microscopic tubes connecting the arterioles with the smallest 
branches of the veins. Their walls permit the passage of nutrient 
substances from the blood to the tissues and that of waste products 
back into the blood. Capillaries are arranged in fine network 
formation, the character of which differs in various tissues and in 
individuals. By means of the capfilaries, blood reaches practically 
every part of the body. The average diameter of the capillary 
is considerably less than one one-thousandth of an inch. 

The Circulation, 

The function of the chculation is to supply nourishment to 
the tissues of the body, to remove waste products, to supply 
sufficient heat and remove excess heat, and so guard against infec- 
tion. In discussing the muscles we learned that their adequate 
functioning depended upon adequate blood-supply. Consequently, 
irregularities and other abnormalities in the blood supply interfere 
with muscular reaction, and through it, with movement. Pour 
factors determine normal blood-fiow : heart-beat ; resistance to 
blood throu^ sides of vessels, especially peripheral resistance in 
narrowness of the small arteries ; elasticity of the arterial and the 
venal walls ; and quantity of blood in the system. Variations 
in the blood-flow are caused by an increase or decrease in the rate 



68 


PHYSIOLOGICAL ORGANISM 


and force of tlie heart-beat ; increase qr decrease in the size of the 
blood-vessels ; constriction and dilation resulting from the operation 
of the vasomotor nerves ; diminution of elasticity in the vessel 
walls, the hardening of the arteries as in old age ; loss of blood 
through disease or injury ; respiration and gravity. The 
maintenance of high arterial pressure is the chief function of a 
normal circulation. 

Effect of Circulatory Variations. 

Deficient blood-supply will make any movement less smooth 
or less efficient than normal blood-flow. In the first place it 
unpoverishes the sensitivity of the nerve endings ; it likewise reduces 
the speed and accuracy of muscular contraction. As a result the 
best muscular reaction to a touch stimulus cannot be made. 
Examples of such conditions are readily given ; the “ warmmg- 
up ” of the pitcher in base-ball ; the swinging of the arms in cold 
weather, the playing of a few chords, or arpeggios, by the pianist, 
preliminary to the beginning of the actual program ; aU these 
are done for their efEect upon the circulation. The ‘‘ stiffness 
of early morning is less joint than muscular, and in turn, circulatory 
stiffness. 

Cold weather drives the blood from the peripheral vessels to 
the more vital internal regions, where maintenance of a constant 
temperature is necessary: a device of biological economy. As 
a result, the finger-tips are the first to become affected by cold. 
When the withdrawal of blood is sufficient, a state of complete 
numbness (“numb 'with cold”) may result, in which all touch 
sensations at the finger-tips are lost. The fingers become “ stiff ”, 
that is to say, their free and skilled movements are interfered with. 
In the finely skilled movements used in piano-playing even a 
slight interference is sufficient to hamper an adequate performance. 
In fact, just because these interferences are so often minute, they 
escape detection and the resulting awkwardness is attributed to 
other causes. Pupils not infrequently lose from five to fifteen 
minutes of a half-hour piano lesson before circulation has been 
sufficiently established to “ limber up ” the fingers. When this 
recurs at each lesson throughout the winter months, the amount of 
time lost is a serious item in deterinining the progress for that 
term. It not only consumes valuable time but also affects the 
pedagogic method, inasmuch as it makes postponement of work 
necessary. 

The effect of impaired circulation upon the mechanics of physio- 
logical movement is two-fold : it impairs both speed and accuracy. 



THE NEUEAL AND CIECULATOEY SYSTEMS 69 

Speed depends upon tlie readiness with, whicli the muscle reacts 
to a stimulus, and, since this reaction in turn demands adequate 
blood-supply, with equally adequate removal of waste-products, 
prompt reaction witiL subnormal circulation is not possible. 
Accuracy, measured here by spacing and dynamic control, likewise 
depends upon the sensitivity of the touch-organs and other 
kinesthetic stimuli. This is the function of the nerves, which can 
only transmit the impulse they have received. If the latter be 
deficient, the transmission will be deficient. Especially the finger- 
tip, that is, its fieshy part, is rich in end-organs of touch. The 
corresponding intricate capillary arrangement will cause even slight 
circulatory changes to affect this part, whereas similar quantitative 
changes would leave other parts unaffected. The fingers and finger- 
tips are essentially organs for fine adjustments, and are, accordingly, 
the first to feel small physiological changes. 

Since the piano teacher, unless he be also a trained physiologist, 
should not undertake to correct any pathological condition, most 
of the problems presented by variations in circulation are outside 
of his field. Some general suggestions, however, may be found 
helpful. 

Amy harmless device that will increase the circulation is useful. 
Swinging the arms into a position across the chest, sending the blood 
to the finger-tips throng centrifugal force is good ; rubbing the 
hands together, or against some soft surface so as to produce heat ; 
washing the hands in warm water will help sometimes, although 
not always. . Timing the lesson arrival ten or fifteen minutes before 
the scheduled time, thus allowing time for warming the fingers is, 
perhaps, the best plan. Any form of muscular activity, particularly 
that usmg the arms, hands, and fingers, will increase the blood- 
flow to these parts. This may also be accomplished by stoopmg 
well forward with arms hanging vertically, in which position gravity 
will send the blood into the fingers. 

Duration of Variations, 

Variations in blood-supply fall into one of two classes : temporary 
deviations from the norm, caused by conditions immediately 
preceding the variation in blood-supply; and more permanent 
deviations caused by some pathologi^ defect. The temporary 
deviations can be corrected by appropriate exercise ; the patho- 
logical condition needs medical attention. One very interesting 
example has come to my notice. It was a rather pronounced case 
of Eenaud’s Disease. (&culation, as soon as the weather became 
reasonably cold, stopped at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints. 



70 PHYSIOLOGICAL OEGAMSM 

leaving aU the fingers bloodless. The greenish-white pallor of the 
fingers contrasted sharply with the normal colouring of the body 
of the hand. NatnraEy all sensitivity of the fingers was lost ; 
a deep pin-prick wonld canse neither pain nor a sign of blood. 
Piano-playing was impossible because the finer finger-movements 
could not be executed. The fact that it was impossible to know 
when the finger touched the key did not disturb as much as might 
be supposed. This is because our kinesthetic sense depends much 
more on sensations of strain and muscular position than upon pure 
cutaneous sensations. In the case cited vigorous rubbing of the 
hands re-established circulation sufficiently, but not until a material 
part of the lesson-time had been consumed. 

Causes of Girodatory Va/riations. 

Variations in blood supply may affect either the quality or the 
quantity of blood and lymph or both. They are caused by the condi- 
tion of the blood itself; the condition of the heart, arteries, 
capillaries, and veins ; distribution of the blood vessels ; posture 
of the body ; exercise ; general bodily condition. 

The condition of the blood, its percentage of leucocytes, 
phagocytes, platelets, and lymph determines, among other things, 
its specific gravity and fluidity, its clotting coefficient and chemical 
value in nourishing the tissues and removing waste-matter from 
them. The condition of the heart, its readiness to respond to varia- 
tions in the intensity of demands made upon it and the con- 
tractility of its muscles, together with the functioning of its valves, 
determines the amount of blood sent to any part of the body within 
a given time and hence the nourishing value of the circulation. 
The condition of the blood-vessels, the permeability of the capillary 
walls, the contractility of the arterial and venal walls as well as 
their pliability determines the amount of nutrition reaching the 
tissues and the rate of blood-flow. A rich network of capillaries 
insures an even distribution of blood for all parts of the body thus 
supplied. This, in turn, results in added nutrition and improved 
response of nerves and muscles. 

Thus is the efficiency of muscular reaction bound up intimately 
with the circulation in the body. As a result, the mechanical process 
of transferring a neural stimulus into an objective force-effect is 
not a simple cause-and-effect relationship. But the fact that the 
relationship is highly complex does not invalidate a mechanistic 
explanation. The real teacher, of whom there are, imfortunately, 
relatively few, will not rest content with a casual ‘'that pupil 
simply is not talented ”, but will seek to find the causes of the 



THE NEUEAL AM) CmCELATOKY SYSTEMS 71 

defective playing. This he can do only if he knows thorou^y 
his tools, and these include the elements of circulation and nerves 
as well as of the bones and muscles. 

Conclusions 

1. The value of repetition and drill is to transfer the neural 
representation of a movement from the higher brain centres to the 
lower spinal reflex centres. Eepetition — ^normally manifold — ^is 
thus physiologically necessary in piano practice, and no adequate 
substitute for it exists. 

2. The whole neural system is opposed to isolated or disintegrated 
action. The smallest movement of piano technique, as used in 
actual playing, involves, actively or passively, the trunk as well 
as the arm, hand, and fingers. 

3. Piano technique, for its adequate acquisition, demands a 
coordination, not only among the organs of any one sense-depart- 
ment, but among the various sense-departments as well : auditory, 
visual, and kinesthetic. 

4. Efficiency of bodily movement, including the fine movements 
used in piano-playing, is directly connected with a particular 
area of the brain known as the motoi area. 

5. Efficiency of bodily movements, especially the fine movements 
of piano teclmique depends, in part, upon the condition of the 
circulation. An adequate blood supply to nerves and muscles is 
absolutely indispensable to their proper functioniog. 

6. Variations in the technical proficiency of piano pupils can, 
at times, be traced directly to variations m the respective circulatory 
systems. A correction of these circulatory defects will then correct 
lliese technical defects. 




PAST n 

GENERAL ASPECTS OF 
PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 




CHAPTER VI 

Geometrics of Physiological Movement 

A STUDY of tke various joints at wMcTi movement takes place in 
piano-playing, will enable us to tell wkat type of movement is 
possible when the movement is restricted to a single joint. And 
conversely, given the path of the movement, we can learn whether 
or not it is the resultant of motion in one joint or in several joints. 

Rotation in the shoulder-socket will use the humerus as a radius. 
The elbow will describe an ellipse or a circle. Such a motion is 
used in winding a windlass. In this type of movement in which 
joint-motion is restricted to the shoulder-socket, the elbow cannot 
describe a straight line. With the humerus it describes a cone of 


e 



movement the pitch of which varies considerably, and the base of 
which is a spherical surface. In fact, the elbow cannot, in any case 
move in a strai^t line, since the humerus acts as a moving radius 
of jSxed length. As a result the elbow must describe paths along 
the surface of the sphere generated by the multiplanar movements 
of the humerus. 

By restricting the movement to one plane, the humerus as a 
. whole may describe a segment of this plane. The elbow will describe 
one of an uiilimited number of arcs across the base of the cone of 
Fig. 20. The direction of this arc in relation to its plane may be 
a straight line, but the movement of the elbow itself must be an 
arc of a sphere of which the humerus is the radius. So long as the 
shoulder is stationary the elbow cannot move in a straight line. Its 



76 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

motions are all necessarily cnrvilinear, but may take place in any 
direction along tbe spherical surface generated by the cone of move- 
ment shown in Eig. 20. 

When the humerus itself rotates around its longitudinal axis, 
the path described by any point fixed to the humerus and not in 
the axis of rotation will be the arc of a circle the radius of which 
is the perpendicular distance of the point from the axis of rotation. 
Straight-hne movement from simple rotation cannot occur. Thus, 
in spite of the wide range of movements possible through the ball 
and socket joint at the shoulder, aU movements of distal parts are 
CTurvilinear ; the joint does not permit rectilinear movement. 

Movement around the elbow-joint takes place in the arc of a 
circle the shortest radius of which is the length of the fore-arm. 
With the hand extended the radius is increased by the length of 
the hand. The movement, for the reasons given in the shoulder 
and elbow-movements, is curvilinear ; rectilinear movement again 
is impossible. 

Movement around the radio-ulnar articulation is a rotary motion 
of the fore-arm, approximately equivalent to the humerus rotation 
in the upper arm. Points not in tite axis of rotation will, therefore, 
describe arcs of circles and not straight lines. 

The wrist-joint permits rotation in two fundamental planes, 
the one generated by flexion and extension at the wrist, the other by 
abduction and adduction. In both cases the movements of distal 
points are arcs of circles. With flexed fingers the length of the radius 
is the length of the hand from wrist to hand-knuckle, with extended 
fingers, it is from wrist to finger-tip. 

The finger-joints, likewise, generate motion in arcs of circles 
the radii of which are the lengths of the various phalanges. As 
simple hmge-joints they cannot generate rectilinear motion. Illus- 
trations of these examples of curvilinear movement are given later 
in the analysis of vertical and horizontal movements, and in the 
various types of finger-stroke. See also the arcs of Figs. 9 to 14 
and Fig. 20. 

From these observations we may formulate three principles 
which have practical bearings upon problems of piano technique. 

(1) All movement generated by motion at a single joint is 
curvilinear. 

(2) Any motion of a part of the arm in a straight line results 
from simultaneous movement at more than one joint. 

(3) Simultaneous motion in two or more joints can generate 
both rectilinear and curvilinear movement. 

Thus, given a straight-line movement, we know that it is caused 



GEOMETRICS 77 

by the participation of several joints ; but, given a curvilinear move- 
ment, we cannot, from this condition alone, know whether it has 
been generated by motion at a single joint or at several joints. 
This must be determined by a study of the skeletal parts involved 
in the movement, their spatial displacements and the degree of 
curvature in the movement. 

But motion at a joint demands muscular coordination. Move- 
ments in straight lines therefore, since they involve the coordination 
of motion at several joints, are physiologically more complex than 
movements in the arc of a circle caused by one-joint. A straight 
descent of the finger-tip in a finger-stroke is mechanicafiy more 
complex than the curved stroke resulting from a fully extended, 
flat finger. The former involves motion at each of the three finger- 
joints ; the latter motion in only the hand-knuckle. The vertical 
lifting of the arm over the keyboard ; its reverse : a chord-attack ; 
the horizontal transfer of the hand along any part of the strai^t- 
line keyboard ; in short any movement in a straight line, means 
that several joints are participating in generating this movement. 

Isolation, 

In this geometric relationship we find the greatest proof of the 
fallacy of “ fixation ’’ characterizing early piano pedagogy. The 
more we attempt to restrict motion to one joint the more does the 
motion become curvilinear. The bufiding of the keyboard in 
a straight line is opposed to curvilinear movement as here under- 
stood. This condition has been responsible for bufidiog piano-key- 
boards that curve somewhat around the player, which, however, 
have never become generally used. They use the shoulder position 
as the centre of their arcs, attempting thereby to eliminate the trunk 
movements needed for shoTilder movement. 

From a purely geometric standpoint any movement of piano 
technique, excepting one form of the simplest fii^er-stroke, and 
an elbow extension with absolutely vertical upper arm involves 
motion at more than one joint. When we transfer our hand, for 
instance, from the region of middle 0, an octave or two higher, 
the hand describes an arc, hence we may infer movement at one 
joint. But at the same time the line of action in the direction of 
ascent is a straight line parallel to the keyboard, and this necessarily 
involves movement at more than one joint. So it is with most 
other movements ; whereas they may be curvilinear in one or more 
planes they are, almost always, at the same time rectilinear in 
another plane, and are resultants of motion in more than one joint. 
The passing-under of the thumb id scale and aii)eggio work ; the 



78 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

vertical finger-descent ; all cantabile touches ; the lateral shift 
of the hand beyond the five-finger position ; crossing of hands ; 
simple arm-drop ; diatonic tremolo ; in fact any piardstic touch 
has in it some rectilinear motion and this can be produced only by 
movement in more than one joint. There is no exception to this 
relationship between strai^t-line movement and activity at more 
than one joint and, as a result, the isolation of movement to one 
joint is, in actual piano-playing, mechanically and physiologically 
impossible. 

Curved versus Angular Movements. 

But, althou^ a rectilinear component will be found in practically 
all pianistic movements, the major part of the movement, at least 
the part with which we shall be chiefly concerned, and which will 
form the subject of our study, will remain curvilinear. The question 
whether pianistic movements are primarily angular or curvilinear 
may be answered after a study of the mechanical principles under- 
lying the geometric phases of piano-playing. 

The chief geometric characteristic of piano technique is change 
in the direction of motion. And physiologically this probably 
constitutes the biggest problem of technique. A change in direction 
may be abrupt or gradual. In the first case an angle be formed ; 
in the second case, a curved line. The freedom of all curvilinear 
movements when compared to changes in the rectilmear move- 
ments is a fact so patent that its reality need scarcely be further 
shown. The operation of any machine illustrates it, and the readily 
perceptible awkwardness of angular bodily movement will prove it. 
This awkwardness results from iuterference with the law of 
mechanics according to which a body in motion remains in motion 
in unaltered direction unless acted upon by a force. The amount 
and abruptness of change in the path of a moving body depend 
upon the amount of force. Accordingly, sudden and marked changes 
in the direction of a movement involve the expenditure of much 
energy, and since the changes in direction do not, in such a case, 
contribute to the final aim of the movement, the latter becomes 
incoordinated. (See Mechanical Principles, 2 and 7.) 

Repetition, 

A second typical characteristic of pianistic movements is 
repetition, both absolute and relative ; repetition without further 
displacement, and repetition of one part while the movement as 
a whole shifts along the keyboard. This complexity is at the 
bottom of aU but the most elementary five-finger positions. The 
distal part of the arm, let us say, fingers or hand, is performing 



GEOMETRICS 79 

a smaller and usually more rapid movement, while the proximal 
parts of th.e arm ; fore-arm or upper arm, are moving in a wider 
range and usually at a slower rate. The activity at tiie various 
joints, therefore, is neither equal nor devoted to the same end. 
Instead, it usually consists of a slow, fairly continuous movement 
in the larger joints while the smaller joints are engaged in more 
rapid discontinuous movements. 

Absolute repetition is found in such passages as the repeated 
octaves of Schubert’s Erl-King, the accompaniment of Chopin’s 
Berceuse, the left hand, second section of Chopin’s F sharp major 
Impromptu, any sustained trill. In the analysis of such movements, 
I f oimd a pronounced tendency on the part of the player to get away 
from the pure repetition in all rapid forms by shifting some other part 
of the arm than the part directly engaged in tone-production. This 
attempt, not always entirely successful, was so general that some 
physiological necessity must have prompted it. The necessity is 
probably muscular fatigue. In other wor^, rapid repetition ten^ to 
produce fatigue by over-shortening the period of chemical readjust- 
ment between movements. When the player begins to move a second 
part of the arm in addition to the part actually playing, he alters 
the direction-relationship between the parts. As a result he alters 
the muscular coordination somewhat, for the position of the muscles, 
their points of origin, extent, and their points of insertion are such 
that a skeletal part cannot be changed without affecting the 
mechanical pull of muscle, since the tendon is joined to the bone. 
A muscle acting in a certain way with the moved part in a certain 
position, will act in a different way with that part in a different 
position. And conversely, as a part is moved, the action of muscles 
often shifts from one group to another, some acting at a better 
mechanical advantage. This has been explained in detail in the 
analysis of muscular action, where numerous concrete illustrations 
have been given, and it will be further analysed in the study of the 
various touch-forms. 

By adding a slow movement of larger muscles to the rapidly 
repeated movement, the player changes the movement from one 
of absolute repetition, to one of relative repetition. With this he 
eliminates absolute muscular repetition and consequently, in the 
case of rapid movements, reduces the danger of early fatigue. 
Let us take, as an example, rapidly repeated octaves. These are 
usually accompanied by a slow raising and lowering of the wrist. 
The muscular coordination producing the octave, with the wrist 
in a low position, is not exactly the same as that used when the 
wrist is in a high position. Nor is it entirely the same for any 



80 ASPECTS OE PHYSIOLOaiCAL MOVEMENT 

change in wrist-position. (See p. 34, where the principle of range 
of movement is discussed.) For each stroke, therefore, a small 
increment of tmnsed muscle is available, while at the same time, 
a similar increment of used muscle is permitted to recuperate. 
The physiological advantage of this procedure is obvious. At the 
same time we must not forget that it has also a decided psychological 
value, m substituting a higher unit at a slow repetition for the lower 
unit of rapid repetition. 

Once again such a coordination is opposed to the doctrine of 
fixation or isolation. It has a disadvantage on the mechanical side 
because, at first, it increases the difficulty of dynamic control. 
This is shown in Fig. 96, which records various types of rapid tapping 
movements. The wave effects of the top record show the uncalled- 
for dynamic variations resulting from the admixture of the wrist 
movement and the hand-stroke. It takes considerable practice 
to eliminate the variations and yet retain the wrist-movement. 

Sjpeed of Practice. 

In the element of fatigue we find one reason for slow practice 
ia the early stages of instruction, especially in aU repeated move- 
ments. In slow practice the time between strokes is sufficient to 
permit the muscular and chemical readjustment necessary as 
preparation for the following movement. There is no tetanic over- 
lap. The elimination of muscular waste-products is complete before 
the next movement sets in. The quieter the hand, the more 
necessary is slow practice in repeated movements of the fingers, 
if the onset of fatigue is to be retarded. With children, especially, 
it is advisable to pause perceptibly between each repetition of finger 
or hand-stroke, so that the interference of one contraction with 
the next may be eliminated. Needless to say, slow practice has 
also a psychological value in its effect upon the direction of attention, 
but, at this point, we are concerned only with the physiological 
phase. 

In rapid repetition, as figures in later chapters will show, the 
muscular coordination differs from that of slow repetition. The 
mechanical needs of the two movements are different and to meet 
these efficiently, the muscular adjustments must differ. Fatigue 
and fixation will be shown to be necessary correlates of rapidly 
repeated movements, and therefore, if postponement of fatigue 
and relaxation be the pedagogic problem, the reduction of the speed 
of repet.tion is a physiological necessity, to say nothing of the 
muscular tenseness which accompanies the feeling of hurry or 
anxiety as a modification of the biological fear reflex. 



GEOMETRICS 


81 


JDwedion of Mowm&nt. 

Moreover, the directioa of a movement is not in itself an adequate 
indication of the location of the contracting and relaxing muscles. 
The extension of the fore-arm is normally the work of the triceps. 
But if the extension takes place in a vertical plane, gravity will suffice 
to extend the elbow, without any contraction of the elbow extensors. 
And if the extension take place slowly, in such a position, the actual 
flexors remain contracted in order to counteract the accelerating 
effect of gravity. This has led some investigators into wrong 
conclusions as to the simultaneous contraction of antagonistic 
muscles. The contraction of the elbow flexors during a movement 
of elbow extension is not a sign that they are acting as initiators 
of the movement, but as inhibitors. And, for the same reason 
simultaneous contraction of antagonists need not mean inco- 
ordinated movement. Only when the contraction results in 
a hyper-tension, exceeding the demands of the actual resistance 
being overcome, does incoordination begin. We cannot, therefore, 
tell from the appearance of a movement what muscles are con- 
tracting, a fact which we shall meet again and again in analysing 
touch-forms. 

In the best coordinated movement there is a considerable loss 
of energy, if the output is measured solely by the demands of the 
actual tonal values produced. In any keyboard movement, the 
greater part of the energy is consumed in shifting the parts into 
position for the final tone-production, and the amount of energy 
required for this is often a ridiculously small part of the energy 
used in the total movement. Yet, in spite of this apparently wasted 
work, the movement remains coordinated because the spatial 
displacement is absolutely essential to the desired tone-production. 
When the left arm is transferred slowly from a low bass region 
across the 'rig ht hand to reach, let us say, a hi^ treble key, played 
softly, practically the whole energy is used in transferring the arm, 
but a mmute part being required for the actual tone-production. 
Yet the preliminary transfer is necessary in order to reach the 
key. The movement thus remains coordinated. 



CHAPTEK Vn 
Action and Keaction 

We sIaU liave occasion to study in detail the efEect of finger- 
impact upon the joints of the arm in the analysis of coord nated 
movement. In ^s effect is found the operation of a basic 
mechanical principle, the importance of which justifies some 
additional remarks. This principle of action and reaction, briefly 
stated, is that the forces acting on any point at rest are equal and 
opposite. When the fituger-descent is brou^t to a stop by key- 
resistance the upward acting force of this balances the downward 
force of the finger. In a finger-stroke the descent of the finger was 
caused by a decrease in the angle which the finger makes with the 
hand, and this decrease, in turn, resulted from a contraction of 
the flexor muscles. When the descent of the finger-tip is suddenly 
arrested by the piano-key, the effect of the muscular contraction 
is still to decrease the angle referred to. Since the finger-tip cannot 
descend further, the only remaining way in which the angle can 
be reduced is by raising the hand-knuckle. The finger-tip thus 
becomes the fulcrum and the hand-knudde the moving part ; where- 
as, before the finger-tip reached the key the hand-knuckle was the 
fulcrum and the finger-tip the moving part. This interchange 
of mechanical points is an important characteristic of physiological 
movement. It is best observed in gross movement, as seen in 
gymnasia. When the overbad puUejTS are pulled down, the 
shoulders act as fulcra, the biceps contract, the elbows are flexed, 
and the hands are drawn down toward the shoulders. In 
“ chi n ning ” a horizontal bar, the same muscles contract, but here 
the hands are the fulcra and the contraction of the biceps (plus, 
of course, accessory muscles) lifts the entire body until again the 
shoulders are brou^t close to the hands. This dual effect may be 
present in any other contraction, and, as a result, the same muscular 
contraction may produce different movements. If the two finger- 
joints jure flexed, the finger-tip will approach the palm of the hand ; 
but if a resistance be introduced against this flexion, thus making 
movement at the finger-tip impossible, the same contraction of 
the muscles will bring the finger-tip close to the pahn by pulling 
the hand, and fore-arm and uppr arm forward. 

82 



^ ACTION AND EEACTION 83 

For tlie same reason, if the hand-arch be held firm, the impact 
of the finger-tip upon the key will result in an upward jerk at the 
wrist (the nearest relaxed joint). And the force manifested at this 
point win be equal and opposite to the force at the descending 
finger-tip. Even in a very light touch some of this reaction will 
be present. It caimot be eliminated. True, we can inhibit the 
motion by a preceding excessive contraction of the necessary muscles, 
but such contraction is highly incoordinated, since it usually 
exceeds the amount needed for tone-production. 

On the other hand, the attempt to eliminate this reaction and 
thus to permit the finger-tip to exert its full force upon the key, 
is responsible for the fixation of joints to which frequent reference 
has abeady been made. If the hand-knuckle, for example, be very 
relaxed, the reaction will manifest itself as soon as the key is touched 
by the finger. But tone is not produced until the key has been 
almost completely depressed (the point of hammer-escapement) . 
Therefore it is necessary, for the proper force-effect, to keep the 
hand-knuckle fixed as a fulcrum, at least until this point is reached. 
In a relaxed joint a part of the force which is acting upon the key 
is spent in moving the relaxed joint itself, hence must be lost for 
work at the finger-tip. It is for this reason that relaxed tone- 
production, however produced, is normally weaker than rigid 
tone-production. 

Isolation. 

The principle of action and reaction illustrates once more the 
impossibility of muscular or mechanical isolation in the physio- 
logical mechanism of man. External observation of bodily move- 
Edents — ^upon which apparently most authors, teachers, and players 
base then deductions — ^is hopelessly inadequate in an analysis of 
the muscular activity responsible for the movement. For lack of 
motion certainly need not mean lack of force-action. The motion- 
less state may result, it usually does result, from multiplicity 
of forces the total effect of which is equal and opposite. It is the 
familiar principle of the parallelopiped of forces. As a matter of 
fact, lack of motion frequently results from the necessary fixation 
of some point as a fulcrum. The muscle, for example, pulling the 
index fin g er toward the thumb is joined to a bone which carries 
also the connection of the thumb adductor. Accordingly, when it 
is desbed to abduct the second finger toward the thumb, the position 
of the latter must be fixed to act as fulcrum. Consequently, the 
extensors of the thumb, which have nothing dbectly to do with 
the index finger, are contracted. Without their action the thumb 



8i ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

would move toward the second, finger. Only one finger moves, 
but the necessary muscular coordination is not restricted to that 
finger. A similar situation is found in the abduction of any other 
finger, as well as in the grosser movements of the arm, some of which 
will be mentioned in this connection in the chapter on Coordination, 
Moreover, when, with a sufficiently sensitive apparatus we record 
the positions of the various joints or parts of the arm during a move- 
ment, we find that what frequently appears a motionless state is, 
in reality, a minute movement, too small or too rapid to be readily 
detected by the eye. Fig. 21 shows this very nicely. The method of 
direct lever recording was used, one aluminum lever being attached 
closely behind the second finger-joint (first interphalangeal) 
of the index finger, while the otiier lever was attached between 
the hand-knuckles of the third and fourth fingers. This position 



¥lq. 21 . 

The time-lmes in this and in foUc-wing figures v^ere made with a 50 d.v. fork. 


precluded any motion in the hand-knuckle of the index finger from 
affecting the record. In order to detect very small movements in 
the hand-knuckle, the lever was so adjusted that these appeared 
on the record magnified three times. 

Beading from left to right we find both finger and hand stationary. 
The first part of finger descent, from ot to & is accompanied by a 
similar descent in the hand itself {a?- to 6^), which indicates that 
the player making this record used some fore-arm or wrist movement. 
When the finger reaches the key-surface, shown at b, the hand- 
knuckle is affected, as the break in the line at indicates. The 
retardation of finger-descent (6 to c) resultmg from the resistance 
of the key, is directly reflected in the ascent of the hand-knuckle 
(6^ to c^). When the key is fuUy depressed (c) the effect upon the 
hand-knuckle is naturally more marked, and, accordingly, we find 



ACTION AND REACTION 85 

a conspicuous rise in this part (feom to d?). The significant poiat 
is that even the slight resistance introduced by the piano-key is 
not without some effect upon the hand-knuckle. Without the mag- 
nification this (6^ to c^) would have been scarcely noticeable. But to 
infer its absence would be to misconstrue entirely the under- 
lying mechanical principle. The marked break from to cP- is 
a tjTpical illustration of the principle of action and reaction. 


VAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 




Fia. 22 . 


The reaction of finger-key-bed impact upon the wrist is seen in 
Fig. 22. A non-percussive touch was used in this instance, hence 
there is no retardation in the descent of the finger until the key 
is fuUy depressed. This point is marked a. At that moment the 
line recording wrist movement rises (the lever in this record was 



aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa/ 

Fig. 23. 


attached immediately behind the wrist), and as the finger subse- 
quently rises, the wrist, in reaction, falls again to its original level. 

But the reaction carries over further than the wrist ; it also 
affects the elbow. In Fig, 23 this reaction is shown by the rise 
at 6^ in the line recording elbow movement as the key-bed is reached 
(b in the finger-liae). The rise at is too slight, and occurs too 



86 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

soon to be a reaction to tbe impact of tbe finger against tbe un- 
depressed key (shown at point d). It is a sympathetic rise to the 
initial finger-liffc between a and i. This rise is in no way a con- 
tradiction of the principle of reaction with which we are here 
concerned. Because at the point a the finger has not met 
any resistance, and is travelling freely through the air, hence there 
cannot be impact-reaction at another joint. This fact is con- 
clusively shown by recording the movements of finger and hand 
when the former is moved without meeting any resistance. The 
result is given in Fig. 24. I selected hand-movement because, if 
there were any reaction from the finger-movement, this would 
show most clearly in the movement of the hand-knuckle, the 
nearest part. 

The line tracing the hand-movement (the upper line in the figure) 
remains strai^t, although the instrument had been set to magnify 
any deflection five times. The finger-line shows the path for two 
finger ascents and two descents. 


/WW\IWWW\AA/^^ 


Fiq. 24. 


External Resistance, 

This brings to light the necessity for carefully distinguishing 
between a movement made free from external resistance and the 
similar movement made against external resistance. The distinction 
grows in importance in the psychological phases of piano technique. 
In all percussive touches the attainment of the desired tonal effect 
can be shown to depend primarily upon the proper image of that 
result before the movement is initiated. To practice the movement 
without the tonal result is, so far as its direct effect upon the 
application of the movement is concerned, psychologically unsound. 
The mechanical, silent, keyboard devices lose in value on this 
account. 

This does not mean, however, that practice of movement without 
resistance is of no pedagogical value. Quite the contrary. Such 
practice is the best and surest way of teaching the misnamed, but 
technically helpful, isolation of movement. The records given in 



ACTION AND REACTION 87 

this chapter show that with resistance there is a reaction at other 
joints. The inhibition of this reaction demands a spread of tension 
over these joints and hence directly opposes the ai-m of the move- 
ment, which is isolation. By workmg from the zero point of 
intensity to the louder degrees, we proceed from minimal to TTnfl.viTnfl.] 
muscular spread. On the other hand, to demand of a pupil a tone- 
production of even moderate loudness with the finger, while the 
other joints of the hand and arm are fully relaxed, is to demand 
the impossible. No one ever has played that way, and no one 
ever will. 

Action and reaction are present also, and operate the same way 
when the key-attack is so short that muscular adjustments cannot 
be made during key-depression. *When, for example, a chord is 
played loudly and quickly, the hand is firmly fixed as the arm 
descends and before the key is struck. The reaction, I mig ht say, 
is present before the action causiog it. This contradiction is only 
apparent. What actually happens is that the player images the 
key-resistance, and hence prepares the spread of muscular contrac- 
tion, the necessary fixation of the joints, before the key is reached. 
Through experience and talent this image can function very 
accurately, and upon its accuracy depends the question of whether 
or not the player will get the desired tonal result. Insufficient 
fixation or an excess thereof, is to be classed as incoordioated 
movement, because, from the standpoint of interaction, a co- 
ordinated movement is one in which action and reaction are equal 
and opposite. It is the physiological application of the physical 
principle of the parallelopiped of forces, which defines a point at 
rest as acted upon by forces whose directions are opposite and whose 
magnitudes are equal. 


Lateral Finger-movement, 

When finger-movement is mentioned, we normally think of it 
as taking place in a vertical plane, the typical down and up strokes 
of the finger. Seldom is any thought given to the effect of a finger 
stroke on the lateral movement of adjoining fingers. And yet it 
is this lateral action and reaction that gives us the approach to 
a study of the muscular adjustment needed in the hand for a single 
finger-stroke. 

The location of the muscles in the pahn of the hand, and the lines 
of pull of their tendonous attachments, make necessary a direct 
interaction of adjoining fingers. A diagrammatic illustration of 
this arrangement is given in Fig. 26. 



88 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

A, A^ lepresents the meta-carpal and first phalanx of the indes 
finger, left-hand, seen from the palmar side. This makes e the 
hand-knuckle articulation. B, show a simi-ar part of the 
third finger ; c and d the location of the muscles and their coherence. 
A pull on a will thus affect 6, and when a contracts to move A^. 
6 is affected and tends to move B toward A. This effect is always 
present in a free finger-stroke of an untrained hand. Fig. 27 gives 



two illustrations of it. A stroke of the third-finger was used and 
was recorded on the kymograph by means of a pneumatic tambour. 
Deflections in this line are, therefore, not finger-movements, but 
merely record the time of finger-key impact.. The line for the 
second finger, however, recorded the actual finger-movement, 
laterally, and any deflection toward the other Une means that the 




W/. 

PiQ. 27. 

second finger actually moved toward the third or the playing finger. 
During the third-finger-stroke, the second finger was held free, not 
touching any fixed object. The reaction is seen clearly in each case. 

Wherever the third finger plays, as a result of the muscular con- 
traction, the second finger is pulled toward it because the deflections 
in the two lines coincide. This coordination may be readily 
observed in the playing of any untrained pupil, by standing directly 



Plate VI 



Fig. 28. Method for third-finger control during stroke of second finger 





ACTION AND EEACTION 


89 


behind him and watching the lateral finger-shifts that will 
accompany any slow, fairly loud diatonic passage. It is a familiar 
pedagogic problem in violm and violoncello also. 

It follows that when this reaction is eliminated, that is to say 
when the finger-stroke is isolated, the muscular adjustment is 
more complex, covers a wider field thanin the non-isolatedmovement 
just described. For, in order to neutralize the deflection of the 
unused (index) toward the used (third) finger, the muscle on the 
other side of the index finger (thumb side), must be contracted. 
And so on, in various degrees, throughout the hand. Thus what is 
apparently a simple finger-stroke is a very complex adjustment 
of hand muscles, made necessary by the principle of coordination, 
in accordance with which other muscles than those actually moving 
must operate to fix the necessary fulcra. 

A similar condition exists among the dorsal interossei. These are 
bipenniform muscles arising from two heads on adjacent sides of the 
carpal bones. The relationship is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 25. 

Accordingly, a marked downward finger-stroke, let us say, of 
finger A, would tend to puU both h and c toward it, and would 
in turn move B and C in the direction of A. Such mechanical 
interaction, when not desired, is counteracted by the simultaneous 
contraction of muscles opposed to this movement. 

Knowing this, the teacher can proceed to work against the original 
reaction, which is pianistically undesirable. Since the proper co- 
ordination demands contraction of the muscle on the far side of 
the non-playing (passive) finger, so that this finger will remain away 
from the playing finger, resistance may be introduced against the 
passive finger to insure the muscular contraction, and this 
resistance should be maintained while the second :^ger plays. 
The muscular uselessness of holding the pupil's finger in the desired 
pos.tion is discussed in the chapter on Activity and Passivity, 
A method which I have found useful is illustrated in Fig. 28. Here 
the pencil is pressing against the third finger, the pupil pressing 
against the pencil, thus contracting the desired muscle, as the 
index finger, shown in action, continues to move. 

This lateral finger-movement is an interesting example of the 
principle of action and reaction. It serves to show that in all 
physiological movement, similar coordinations directly opposed to 
isolation take place, because the mechanics of the movement do 
not change. A part of the body is not necessarily in a state of 
relaxation or passivity because it is motionless, in fact, unless it 
is resting upon some outside body, or is in another form of stable 
equilibrium, it is never relaxed. 



CHAPTER Vm 


Activity and Passivity 

Bodily movement may be caused in two ways : by voluntary 
or involuntary contraction of muscles througlL neural stimuli, 
or by tbe action of some outside force upon the part to be moved. 
If I lift my arm with the idea of reachingfor something, the movement 
is the result of muscular contraction. This I shall call an active 
movement. If, on the other hand, another person takes my arm 
and lifts it into the same position, the movement is the result 
of the action of the force supplied by the other person, and, so far 
as I am concerned, the movement is passive, since I am not doing 
any work. The movement made by the other person in order to 
bring my arm into the desired position is an active movement. 
If conditions were reversed and I should be lifting his arm, I should 
be making the active movement and he would be making the passive 
movement. The difference in the muscular coordinations between 
these two types of movement has a most important bearing upon 
problems of piano pedagogy. For here the teacher very frequently 
moves the pupil’s arm, hand, or jBngers through the desired move- 
ment. It is advisable to learn whether in so doing the actual 
muscular reaction of the pupil is the same as that made when 
the pupil performs the movement unassisted, or whether there are 
differences, and, if so, what these differences are. 

There are several ways of learning this. Following the plan of 
procedure adopted in other chapters I shall first treat the theoretical 
phases and then correlate these conclusions with actual records 
obtained of the muscular contraction in both tj^pes of movement. 

In the chapter on coordination we shall learn that economy of 
effort— we may caU it the law of least effort — ^is the fundamental 
requirement of a coordinated movement. Nature would defeat 
its own purpose, therefore, if an organism making a passive move- 
ment expended the same amount of energy as when the same 
movement is made actively. If, to return to the example of arm- 
lift described in a preceding paragraph, it takes ten units of force 
for me to hft my arm into the desired position, it will take at least 
ten umts (and necessarily more) for someone else to lift my arm. 

90 



ACTIVITY AND PASSIVITY 


91 


But auy part of this ten that I expend while my arm is being lifted 
is superfluous energy, since the outside agency is capable of doing 
the work. Accordingly, we may expect to find at least less contrac- 
tion in passive than in active movement. 

And since any participation is unnecessary, no contraction what- 
ever would be the most economical procedure and would most 
closely follow the law of least effort, since any contraction, no 
matter how slight, involves some effort. 

The problem is somewhat complicated by the fact that the 
spatial relationships in both types of movement remain the same. 
The points of muscular origin and insertion, therefore, are aLke, 
and yet the condition of the intervening muscle differs. Much 
confusion on this question has arisen through the popular comparison 
of a muscle to an elastic band. The simUe holds only to a limited 
extent. If the property of elasticity, by virtue of which a body 
returns to its original shape when the force responsible for its 
preceding alteration ceases to act, were inherent in the muscle, 
any stretching of a muscle would be accompanied by a constantly 
increasing resistance, equal exa,ctly to the force responsible for 
the stretching. This is the principle upon which all spring balances, 
sling-shots, and similar devices are based. It is entirely opposed 
to the principle of relaxation which is discussed in the chapter on 
Properties of Muscles, and also to that of coordination, discussed 
in Chapter IX. 

The same opposition is found when the distance between the 
points of origin and insertion is lessened. If elasticity were an 
inherent muscular property, the muscle would contract directly 
with diminution of this distance, whether the movement be made 
actively or passively. But muscular contraction involves work, 
and work is always the result of an expenditure of energy. Hence 
we should have the muscle, in passive movement, doing the same 
amount of work as in active movement, a condition flatly opposed 
to the law of least effort. 

The diSerence between elasticity and contractility, lies in the 
fact that the latter, for its operation, depends upon the presence 
of a neural stimulus. Without this (or an artificially supplied 
stimulus) a muscle does not contract. The degree of contractility 
does not depend upon the spatial relationship between the points 
of origin and of insertion, it depends upon the intensity of the neural 
stimidus. A muscle may, therefore, have similar shapes yet be in 
opposite stages of contractility. If the arm be sufficiently bent at 
the elbow by an outside force, the pressure of fore-arm against 
upper arm will cause a swelling in the region of the biceps muscle. 



92 ASPECTS OE PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

A similar sweUing occurs when the biceps is contracted voluntarily, 
but the physiological states of the muscle in the two cases are widely 
different. In one case no muscular activity is going on, no chemical 
changes are taking place ; in the other work is actually being done 
with chemical changes in the production and elimination of heat 
and fatigue products. 

These facts are substantiated by records of the muscular contrac- 
tion actually taking place in both types of movement. The method 
of direct observation, which does not involve the use of any 
apparatus, serves to illustrate certain features of the differences 
we are considering. The biceps contraction already mentioned is 
a case in point. VP'ith the back of the hand and the fore-arm resting 
upon a table, place the fingers fiamly over the biceps muscle. This, 
as I have already pointed out, is the muscle meant when the 
enthusiastic youngster asks his companions to ‘‘ feel my muscle ”, 
and proceeds to flex the elbow and supinate the fore-arm. The 
muscle with the fore-arm resting upon the table will be found 
in a relaxed condition. Now proceed to litfc the fore-arm slowly. 
The muscle will contract, and a part of this contraction can be felt 
before the hand or arm leaves the surface of the table ; in other 
words, before movement of the external parts has taken place. 
The points of origin and insertion of the muscle could not, therefore, 
have been altered and thus is shown the independence of the degree 
of muscular contraction from the spatial position of the parts to 
be moved. A weight placed in. the palm of the hand will mtensify 
this reaction. A similar, more marked result, occurs when the hand 
is pushed against an unmovable object, for example, pressed forcibly 
upward against a table or desk. The biceps will contract violently, 
yet the position of shoulder and fore-arm, the places of origin and 
insertion respectively, have not been altered. The contraction 
depends upon the force acting against the muscle, not upon the 
position of the parts. 

A finer, and perhaps, more convincing proof is found when we 
record by graphic means, the contraction of a muscle or its non- 
extensible tendon, when the muscle itself is moving the part, 
and when the same part is being moved by an outside agency. 
The following figures are records of the contraction of the third 
finger tendon of the extensor communis digitorum, the muscle 
responsible for all finger-hft in the hand-knuckle, one of the most 
important pianistic movements. The method of recording is shown 
in Eig. 29. A long aluminium lever, with an adjustable setting 
is so placed that its edge rests upon the tendon, the contraction 
of which is to be recorded. 






?ig. 31. Difference in muscular contraction between passive (a) and active (b) finger-lift 


Fig. 29. Instrument for recording contractions of finger-extensors. 


[To face p, gi 



ACTIVITY AND PASSIVITY 93 

Its position in any otlxer plane of movement is fixed by its own 
axis and. the two points resting upon tbe band near the tendon. 
Any contraction of tbe tendon will tben lift tbe lever, and by making 
this sufficiently long, and placing tbe fulcrum sufficiently close 
to tbe tendon, any degree of magnification may be secured, thus 
recordiug even extremely sli^t degrees of contraction. These 
are tben transferred upon tbe smoked surface of a revolving drum, 
passing beneath tbe free end of tbe lever. 

Tbe results are seen in Fig. 30. In tbe upper line, tbe finger was 
lifted by another person, in tbe lower, tbe subject lifted bis own finger 
by voluntary muscular contraction. An ascent in tbe line indicates 
a puH on the tendon resulting from tbe contraction of tbe muscle, 
tbe height of tbe ascent frimisbii^ a fan: index of tbe degree of 
contraction. In tbe passive movements there is complete absence 
of contraction. In tbe active movements tbe marked contraction 
for each of three successive finger-lifts is clearly shown. Tbe number, 

passive 



extent, and speed of movement were exactly tbe same for both 
experiments. 

In Fig. 31, this diSerence is photographically shown. One 
picture fllustrates tbe third finger being Ifrted by an outside agency, 
and tbe absence of any ridge across tbe back of tbe band, proves 
the absence of tbe muscular contraction ; whereas in the other 
picture sbowiug voluntary lift of tbe same finger, tbe well-defined 
ridge across tbe back of tbe band, representing tbe tension of tbe 
tendon leading to tbe muscle, is clearly visible. 

Tbe rubber-band simile is thus seen to be inadequate in tbe 
study of muscular reaction. Tbe muscle does not contract when 
tbe distance between tbe skeletal and muscular attachments merely 
decreases, but only if tbe decrease demands overcoming external 
resistance. Slack is taken up only when opposed by muscular 
activity m tbe antagonists. Tben tbe give and take ” is very 
nicely adjusted, leading to very fine degrees of coordinated 
movement. When the movement is caused by external force alone. 



94 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

the purpose of any “ balanced ” reaction obviously vanishes, since 
the organism no longer has anything to do with the aim of the 
movement. 

The same passive condition holds when external forces stop a 
physiological movement. If the arm be moved rapidly in a lateral 
direction — ^as for example, in a leap from middle C to C^ on the key- 
board — ^it will normally be brought to a stop by appropriate con- 
traction of the large chest-muscle (pectoralis major). If, on the 
other hand, a cushion be placed at the end of the movement, and 
the arm be thrown freely against it, letting the cushion do 
all the stopping, the need for muscular contraction vanishes, and 
the muscle takes no part in the movement. This is shown in Fig. 34, 
a, &, in the chapter on Coordination and Incoordination. 

The muscles yielding in stretch to the increase in distance involved 
do so without ^y increase over their normal tonicity. And the 
muscles yielding to a decrease in distance likewise do so without 
an alteration of their normal tone. This leaves for consideration 
the muscular reaction when the distance, relationships remain 
constant and the muscular contraction changes. What happens, 
for example, when the finger-tip meets a fixed obstacle — such as 
the fully depressed piano-key— yet the muscles controUiug finger 
descent continue to contract ? Do the antagonistic muscles continue to 
relax proportionatelyordotheyceasewhenextemalmovementceases? 

Since all such contraction is voluntary, and, since the com- 
pensatory relaxation of the antagonistic muscle group is con- 
comitant with this contraction, in the sense, of course, that it 
contributes to the coordination of the movement, we may expect 
the relaxation to parallel the contraction. When movement has 
stopped, therefore, but contraction continues, the other muscles 
will reach the state of h37per-relaxation. The tendon will become 
slack in proportion to the degree of excess contraction of the other 
muscles. If this results, let us say, in ten units of excess pressure 
on the key-bed, there wiU be ten units of “ slack ” (hjrper-relaxation) 
in the antagonistic muscular group. The presence of this excess 
looseness is illustrated in the chapter on Coordination, p. 117, 
where the experiment of pushing the tendon to either side, to show 
the slack, is described. The relationship concerns the active and 
passive phases of movement only in so far as the excess relaxation 
bears a close mechanical analogy to the passive state of movement, 
although I do not feel that they are entirely the same. They both 
are forms of moderate incoordination, since, in order to become 
effective, the hyper-relaxed muscles must first take up the slack ” 
in the tendons. 



ACTIVITY AND PASSIVITY 95 

Degrees of Activity and Passivity, 

Tlie active and passive conditions of movement do not necessarily 
exist in a mutually exclusive state* A movement may partake 
of tlie attributes of botb. If I am lifting a heavy weight and a 
second person assists me, I am both actively and passively engaged 
in the movement ; actively, to the extent that I myself am doing 
the work, passively, to the extent that the assistance offered relieves 
me of the necessity for doing it all. The degrees to which the two 
forms combine are unlimited, varying throughout the entire dynamic 
range of movement. The assistance which we receive may be almost 
nothing, when the movement will be almost entirely active. Or 
the assistance may be nearly complete, in which case tiie movement 
will be practically entirely passive. 

The question remains, of course, as to how gravity, as an external 
force, affects the activity and passivity of movement. The arm, 
for example, unless supported by some external resistance or 
muscular contraction, will fall through the action of gravity, hence 
without the contraction of the arm-depressors. Is this, then, 
a passive movement ? We shall be obliged to answer in the 
aflSrmative, because our definition of passivity was based upon 
absence of muscular contraction. When, however, such an arm- 
drop is controlled — ^and the uncontrolled drop, as I shall show later, 
plays no part in piano technique — we have at least a partially 
active movement. Moreover, since gravity is a constant, and a 
force actually determining the basic coordination of all physio- 
logical movements, we may safely exclude it as a detemadnant 
of the activity or passivity of a movement in the sense in which 
the variable external resistance introduced by some obstacle or 
second person acts as a determinant. This does not mean, however, 
that its influence on the various touch-forms is to be minimized. 
Quite the contrary, its action is certainly one of the important 
determinants, perhaps the most important, of the fomas of move- 
ment used in all piano touches . In order to avoid confusion of terms, 
I shall discuss this action under the positive and negative aspects 
of the various touch-forms. 

Movement-Phase, 

Most movements in piano technique involve repetition. More- 
over, most of them are reciprocal motions, movements in opposite 
directions. One direction produces tone, the other serves merely 
as the spatial preparation of the next tone-production. Pinger- 
lift, for example, is in itself useless for tone-production ; its use 
lies in the preparation which it gives to the next finger-descent, 



96 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

tte actual tone-producing stroke. Arm-lift is useful only because 
it enables .us to follow it with an appropriate arm-descent. Finger- 
lift and arm-bft, therefore, may be considered the negative move- 
ments, finger-descent and arm-descent, the positive movements. 
Keyboard Application, 

These conditions all have a direct bearing on various problems 
of piano technique. A very usual method of procedure employed 
to teach a pupil new movements — be they of finger, hand, or arm — 
is to take the part to be moved and by appropriate force move it 
for the pupil through the desired range. The teacher supplies 
the force and makes the movement actively whereas the pupil 
makes it passively. As a result the muscles responsible for the 
movement do not contract and hence cannot either receive or send 
the proper stimulus to the brain-centres. Muscularly the pupil 
has learned nothing. At the most he has been given certain 
sensations of rotation at the joint at which movement takes place. 
In view of unfinished experiments I am not at present prepared to 
say to what extent these are a help later on in reproducing the 
movement, for this is primarily a psychological problem. But 
we may rest assured that muscularly the reaction is not that which 
is ultimately responsible for tlie movement. 

As a matter of fact, if the correct muscular contraction be the 
pedagogic aim, just the opposite method of procedure is advisable. 
Instead of mtroducing a force acting in the desired direction of 
movement, we should introduce a resistance against this movement, 
or, what is the same thing, a force acting in an opposite direction 
to the desired movement. If finger-hft be the problem, press down 
upon the finger instead of helping to lift it ; if finger-drop be the 
problem, press up against the descending finger. Then, and then 
only, will the correct muscles be contracted, because a muscular 
condition does not depend upon the position of the parts but upon 
the external resistance opposing the maintenance of the position. 
There can be no doubt of the physiological or mechanical advantage 
of this procedure, even if it is opposed to the usual pedagogic 
procedure. The value, if any, in aiding a movement by relieving 
the maker of the movement of a part of the work cannot rest in 
any physiological or mechanical phase. It violates absolutely 
a fundamental law of physiological mechanics. But this help should 
not be confused with a somewhat similar, very helpful, procedure 
in which a slight touch or pressure in the direction of the movement 
is supplied by the teacher. This acts merely as a suggestion following 
which the pupil makes the movement unaided. 

For the same reason practice in tone-production without key 
or some substituted resistance is pedagogicaUy unvrise. The key- 



ACTIVITY AND PASSIVITY 


97 


resistance causes the muscular contraction — without the former, 
the latter is absent. And this brings us to an important point : 
the distinction between the appearance of a movement and its 
mechanical nature. The characteristic “ playing in the air ’’ or 
“ on the surface of keys ”, typical of pupils in whom finger-action 
has been unduly stressed is the result of separating the visual 
aspect of the movement from the mechanical. The only logical 
use of finger-action is the production of an appropriate tone, and 
this production depends entirely upon speed of key-depression,^ 
that is to say, upon appropriate overcoming of the key-resistance. 
We cannot judge the coordination from the appearance of a move- 
ment but solely from its mechanical nature. 

These observations apply to any touch-form. The contraction 
of a muscle depends not upon fljssistance but resistance. Any 
external help given in a movement absolves the muscles from the 
necessity of doing that much work, and results in an incoordioated 
movement so far as its pianistic value is concerned. All exercises 
in which the muscular activity is accompanied by external assistance 
do not permit the proper coordination. Exercises for increasing 
the various stretches may help, if carefully done, by slightly in- 
creasing the extensibility of the tissues ; but they do not develop 
the muscular coordination which, later on, is used to attain the 
stretch in actual playing. 

The distinction between the positive and negative phases of 
movement is not merely academic. Instead, it is based upon a 
mechanical difference. A negative movement has no external 
resistance to overcome, the resistance of friction among the parts 
moved, being internal. A positive movement does overcome 
external resistance. In lifting the finger, its own weight (plus, of 
course, friction at the joints) is the oiily opposition to the movement, 
and the movement does no external work. In finger-descent, 
on the other hand, the aim of the movement is key-depression. 
It is necessary in all practice to keep this distinction in mind. 
If finger-lift be considered the positive element, the movement 
results in an excessive lift with the extensors straining against the 
fully extended tendons and ligaments. (An interesting illustration 
is given under Arm-Legato.) This represents so much wasted work. 
It does not lift the finger higher, hence cannot effect the foUowing 
finger-descent favourafty. Normally the pupil’s attention should 
be directed toward the positive not the negative phase of the move- 
ment. This we shall have occasion to note repeatedly in discussing 
the various touch-forms. 

^ Ortmann, Physical Basis of Piano Touch and Tone. 



98 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

The fundamental law of passivity, therefore, may be stated as 
a subsidiary of the law of least effort : whatever work is done by 
an outside agency in moving any part of the body, relieves the 
muscles normally responsible, and as a result, they relax, and the 
physiological nature of the movement changes, though its external 
appearance remains the same. 



CHAPTEE IX 

Coordination and Incoordination 

A MOVEMENT is tile displacement of a certain body tbxongli a 
certain space in a certain interval of time. Since in piano-plajdng 
random movements are not considered, we may add aim, as a fonrtli 
element of movement, to weight, distance, and time. A coordinated 
movement is a movement which fulfills the requirements of arm* 
weight, space, and time with a miniTnum waste of physiological 
energy. An incoordinated movement is a movement in which this 
minimum is not reached. Waste of psychological energy may be 
produced by incorrect wei^t, distance, or time, as a result of 
which the aim of the movement is either not fulfilled, or is fulfilled 
by an expenditure of energy greater than that necessary for 
particular movement. Suppose a force of ten is required to move the 
arm through one octave in a hali-second, producing a tone of given 
loudness. A force of less than ten with the other elements constant, 
will then not suffice to meet these requirements. The tone will 
be too soft, or the time of the hand-movement will exceed one-half 
second. A force of more than ten, no part of which is acting 
antagonistically to another part, will cause too loud a tone, or too 
great a leap, or too quick a movement. These excess effects may 
be counteracted by appropriate contraction of the antagonistic 
muscles. If, for example, the speed be sixteen units instead of 
twelve, a contraction of four in the antagonistic muscles will 
reduce the speed to the desired rate. But together there will be an 
expenditure of twenty units to produce work which twelve can do. 
So that, although the movement, to all outward appearances, 
will have been correctly executed, the adjustment is biologically 
wasteful, and the movement becomes incoordinated. 

Eelaooation and Coordination. 

In piano-playing the mechanical aim of all movements is the 
production at the piano-key at the proper time and place of a force 
sufficient to produce the desired tonal intensity. However 
complicated the final results of artistic piano-playing may be, 
they are produced entirely by variations in time-duration, in 
direction or pomt of application, and in force. Suppose middle C 

99 



100 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

is to be played with, a force of eight ounces. This force can be 
secured in many ways. I can drop my arm (the normal adult 
arm wei^ from 6 to 15 lbs.) from a considerable height, letting 
gravity accelerate the movement and increase its force. This will 
be far in excess of what is needed. Accordingly, as the finger 
appoaches the key, I must inhibit the descent of the arm by con- 
tracting the forward abductors of the shoulder. If this inhibition 
be just the amount needed, the finger will reach the key with the 
desired force-effect of eight ounces. The movement as a whole, 
however, will have been incoordinated, since there would have been 
obvious waste of effort. The inhibition of descent will have been 
a coordinated movement since the goal was reached. If, in order 
to produce the same effect, I raise my arm for a part of the distance, 
sufficient, when it is dropped, just to produce the desired force- 
effect, the entire movement will be coordmated, because there are 
no excess movements either in force or in amplitude. 

We are now in a position to understand the relationship between 
relaxation and coordiaation— by no means sjmonymous terms. 
A coordinated movement necessitates the presence of just that 
degree of muscular relaxation that will transmit the desired force 
to the desired point in the proper time. The degree of relaxation 
depends entirely upon the force required to produce the effect, 
more rigidity or less than necessary ^1 produce an mcoordinated 
movement. An incoordinated movement results from excess 
relaxation as well as excess contraction. Too much relaxation 
(as in locomotor ataxia) may produce a movement just as inefficient 
as that produced by too little relaxation, as in paralysis of a muscle- 
nerve. 

Let us take the normal arm-hand position shown in Fig. 166 as 
an example. The weight of the arm is supposed to rest upon the 
keyboard through the finger-tips. If normal arm-weight be active, 
this win suffice not only to depress the keys upon which the fingers 
are placed but also to exert a considerable part of its weight upon 
the elbow and the wrist joints. If these joints were completely 
relaxed, no resistance would be offered to the vertical action of the 
arm-we^ht. As a result, the wrist would be forced down and for- 
ward until the hand rested against the wooden casing beneath the 
keyboard of the piano. Or, the upper arm would seek a vertical 
position and puU hand and fore-arm from the keys. Such an arm- 
position, as we shall see later, is useless for piano-playing. As 
a matter of fact, it is mechanically impossible to rest the entire 
weight of the arm on the keys. Some of this necessarily is supported 
at the shoulder. But even whatever is left, can be transmitted 



COOEDINATION AOT) INCOOEDINATION 101 

to tlie filler-tips and through, them to the keyboard, only when 
every joint between the shoulder and the finger-tips is held 
sufficiently rigid to support, without movement, whatever weight 
is to be so transmitted. The mechanics of this leverage system 
are discussed later in connection with the various types of 
pianistic touch. The proof thereof will be found in the chapter on 
Eelaxation. 

The shoulder, in such a case, is the only fully relaxed joint 
involved in the arm-rest position. All other joints are fixed beyond 
the resistance point, or, at least, up to the resistance point necessary 
to support the arm-weight. Since the aim of the movement is 
just this support of the arm, the movement is fully coordinated. 
Here, then, coordination and relaxation are actually opposed. 
When such joint-fix:ation exceeds the amount demanded by the 
force of finger-key impact we have an incoordinated movement. 
The “ stiff wrist of pupils is an example. This stiffness, however, 
is not without a physiological basis. High finger-lift is normally 
associated with contraction of those wrist muscles which lower the 
hand at the wrist ; down-stroke of the finger with the contraction 
of the muscles pulling back the hand at the wrist. A rapid alter- 
nation of finger-lift and finger-drop, accordingly, sets up simul- 
taneous contraction of the antagonistic muscle groups at tih.e wrist 
and causes stiffness. Slow finger-stroke agamst little or no 
resistance will eli mi nate the stiffiiess. This association between 
fimger and wrist muscles, needless to say, is a mechanical necessity 
iE the force is to act at the fiboger-tip. Otherwise, instead of moving 
the key, the wrist will move in the opposite direction. 

Whenever the tendon of a muscle passes over more than one 
joint, relative fixation of aU joints over which it passes is necessary 
to permit the force to act at the desired point. And since practically 
all tendons pass over two joints, some even over four, isolation and 
relaxation, in their strict sense, do not exist in the physiological 
organism as applied in piano-playing. 

If, instead of a fiLxed position, we consider the process during 
the movement itself, we find similar conditions. If the arm be 
permitted to drop freely its speed will vary with the time, since 
gravity is a constant. Any speed slower or faster than this shows 
muscular control ; if faster, it shows contraction of the muscles 
pulling downward on the arm, if slower, it shows contraction of 
the muscles pulling upward. Since the centre of gravity of the arm 
is just below the elbow, a perfectly relaxed arm would descend 
with this point in a straight line. As the key-level is reached the 
hand would be bent back (since the various finger-joints and the 



102 ASPECTS OF PHSYIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

wrist-joint are supposed to be fully relaxed) and tbe arm would 
assume tbe position described in the preceding paragraphs, so that 
here again complete relaxation would defeat the purpose of the 
movement. 

Yariations in Coordination. 

A preliminaiy survey of coordinated movements discloses, 
among other things, that muscular coordination changes with 
a change in the speed, range, and force of a movement. The 
muscular action of a rapid movement differs from that of the same 
movement of extent and force, made slowly ; the action of a force- 
ful movement differs from that of a weak movement of the same 
range. 

S'peed Effects. 

We speak correctly of coordinated and incoordinated movements 
because the same movement, so far as its external characteristics 
are concerned, may be made in many, physiologically various, 
ways. And changes in the speed of a movement, though its range 
and direction remain unchanged, likewise involve variations in 
muscular response. These variations are not necessarily inco- 
ordinated movements. Quite the contrary ; they usually indicate 
a high degree of coordination. 

In considering the effect of speed upon the muscular actioix in 
a movement, the most natural inference is that increase in the speed 
of the movement is paralleled by a like increase in the speed of 
muscular reaction, extending throughout the range of movement. 
This, however, is not true. The type of muscular reaction changes 
radically with variations in the speed of movement ; it must do 
so for mechanical reasons. Taldng the arm for an example, we have 
its wei^t as a constant and, since we are dealing here with a given 
movement, the range and the general direction as other constants. 
The variable is speed. If the muscle contracts more quickly 
(forcibly) it carries the arm through a given distance in less time. 
The arm thus attains a greater momentum. A contiuuation of this 
increase in muscular contraction will naturally reach its TyiaTiTmiTn 
at the end of the movement. Lx order to bring the movement to 
an end, therefore, a maximal impact with some obstacle must take 
place, or an instantaneous relaxation of the contracted muscles 
and powerful contraction of the antagonistic muscles in order to 
overcome the momentum of the moving arm in that instant. 
Mechanically this interaction of forces, in the case of muscular 
contraction, may be compared to the sudden application of the air- 
brakes on a rapidly moving rail-road train ; or in the case of impact, 



COORDINATION AND INCOORDINATION 103 

to the striking together of two obstacles. The shock — ^the result 
of maximal force-transformation in mininial time — ^not only 
places a considerable strain on most parts of the mechanism 
but also lessens the control of the act on considerably. This un- 
desirable effect of shock on muscular movement, is discussed 
repeatedly later on, in connection with the analysis of various 
pianistic movement forms. 

In a slow movement the same arm generates less force, this 
being the product of the mass and the acceleration. The momentum 
being less, the necessary inhibition can readily occur very close 
to the end of the movement. If we assume, in order to make this 
difference clearer, that one-fifth of a second is required to bring 
the arm to rest, a slowly moving arm may be practically at the 
end of its movement before the muscles need contract to bring it 
to a full stop. A rapidly moving arm on the other hand covers 
much more space in a fifth of a second. Hence the muscles will 
have to contract earlier in the course of the movement or more 
powerfully nearer the end. This is necessary because the rapidly 
moving arm has a greater momentum, which requires a greater 
force to overcome it. 

In the second place it takes time and force to set a body at 
rest into motion. In a slow movement this time is not a conspicuous 
determinant. But in a rapid movement, a quick “ get-away ’’ is 
obviously essential. That is to say, it is necessary to set the arm 
into motion as quickly as possible. This demands more force, 
and accordingly a greater initial muscular contraction. The arm 
at the beginning of its movement, is thus given considerable speed. 
Thereupon the muscles are somewhat relaxed, while the arm, 
through its initial momentum, continues on its path as a relatively 
free body. Since the initial speed may be made sufiSciently great 
to meet the aim of the movement further increase during the 
movement is not necessary. 

A force may be measured by the work it does, which in turn is 
shotm in the time and distance through which an object is moved. 
Assuming that inertia, atmospheric and joint resistances, and 
gravity are constants ; and that a force of 1 will move the 
arm through 1 inch in 1 second ; then a force of 6 will move the 
arm through 6 inches in 1 second. At the end of the first second 
the arm has a velocity of 6 inches per second. If, thereupon, 
the force ceases to act, the arm will continue at this rate (ignoring 
the factors of inertia aud resistance mentioned). At the end of 
6 seconds, therefore, the arm will have covered a distance of 
30 inches. Now suppose that a force of 1 acts during the first 



104 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

second. This will move the arm through 1 inch (5 inches less 
than the distance before). Then a force of 3*5 will move it 3*5 inches 
during the second second, giving a total displacement of 4*5 inches 
in two seconds. At a similar rate of force-increase the arm will 
move 6 inches during the third second (or a total of 10*5 inches) ; 
8*5 in the fourth ; 11*0 in the fifth. Totalling these distances 
gives a displacement equal to the other, 30 inches. These 
relationships may be diagranunatically illustrated as in Fig. 32. 

The straight line shows the arm-displacements when the maximum 
velocity is attained at the beginning and maintained throughout 
the stroke. The upper, curved line shows the displacements with 
a slow begimiing and increase of velocity during the movement. 
The dark points show the positions of the moving body at each 



second. Finally, the shaded portion may serve to indicate the excess 
energy required in giving to the arm its necessary final velocity 
after a slow beginning. lie figure is purely diagrammatic. Eecords 
of actual movements are given later. 

Thus, by using a maximum at the beginning of the movement, 
a force of six sujBBices. By beginning slowly and adding force 
throughout the movement, a ^al maximum force of eleven is 
needed, almost double the other. Various rates of increase, of 
course, are possible, but, regardless of the actual rate, any increase 
during the movement represents excess energy, which, as we have 
seen, is characteristic of incoordinated, not coordinated movements. 

But it does not follow that this advantage applies to slow move- 
ments. The slower the movement the greater is the eflPect of the 
constant factors, heretofore ignored: atmospheric and joint- 


COOEDINATION AND INCOOEDINATION 105 

resistances, gravity, and inertia. Take the action of gravity, for 
instance, in a horizontal movement. Assume its. numerical value 
to be 2. Its direction of pull, in a horizontal movement, will be at 
right angles to the line of arm-movement, and will tend to pull 
the arm down. If the movement lasts two seconds, gravity will 
exert a total force-effect of 2 x2 or 4, the product of the numerical 
value of the force and the time through which it acts. If the 
movement lasts 10 seconds gravity will exert a total force of 10x2 
or 20 ; five times as great as before. Again, assume the joint- 
resistance through the 30 inches of movement to be 60, the mass 
of the arm 10, and its acceleration 6. Since force equals the product 
of the mass and the acceleration, the force of the moving arm will 
be 10 X 6 or 60, sufl&cient to overcome the joint-resistance. Now 
suppose the speed of the same arm to be 2 instead of 6. Its force 
will then be 10x2 or 20, only one-third of the force necessary to 
overcome the resistance. At the same time gravity acts for a 
longer period and its force is correspondmgly increased. Gravity 
itself, still remains a constant, of course, but the length of time 
during which it acts increases its force-effect. 

The alternative would be a jerky movement, in which the arm 
would move in spurts, resting between them. Such a movement 
is so obviously at a mechanical and physiological disadvantage 
that we can at once exclude it from consideration. 

In recording slow movements, therefore, we may expect to find 
a less intense but more prolonged muscular contraction than in 
rapid movements. And, as the speed of movement increases, 
the initial muscular contraction should become more and more 
noticeable. 

I have selected, for the purpose of recording, the contraction 
of the pectoralis major. This muscle was chosen for several reasons : 
first, because, as it passes the front of the arm-pit, it is superficial 
enough, and its contraction sufficiently marked to transmit readily 
the movement to an appropriately arranged tambour ; and, in 
the second place, because the pectoralis major is directly involved 
in the lateral shifts of the arm (octave leaps and the like), that 
form an important part of pianistic movements, as well as in all 
forced arm-drops, a type of movement described in detail later. 
The muscle is situated below the collar-bone, spreading out from 
the forward side of the arm-pit in a fan-like manner over the upper 
side of the chest. It condenses considerably as it passes beneath 
and around the lower front of the arm-pit to its insertion in the 
humerus, and the turn taken at the arm-pit makes its contraction 
very noticeable. (See Fig. 176.) 



106 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

TKe method of recording the muscular contractions was the 
following : To one end of a rubber tube a tambour was attached. 
This consisted of a shallow disk covered with very thin sheet 
rubber, to the centre of which a writing lever was fastened. To 
the other end of the tube a specially constructed plunger was 
fastened. This consisted of a small cylinder carrying a piston head 
and rod and working with a Tninimu-m of friction. The return of 
the piston to any original position was insured by the attachment 
of a sensitive spring. The whole apparatus thus made practically 
an air-tight chamber and any outside pressure forcing the piston 
into the cylinder would send a wave of condensation to the tambour, 
pressing out the sheet rubber and lifting the writing end of the lever. 
Such an instrument is sufficiently sensitive to record the contractions 
here measured. The writing lever rested upon a revolving drum 
which recorded any deflections of the point. When the piston 
is held firmly, and at the proper place and angle, against the muscle 
or tendon whose contractions are to be recorded, it will transmit 
these to the tambour, as it is pressed in when the muscle contracts. 
Its position against the muscle may be better fixed by a small 
bipod resting upon two points of the chest or side. Then any 
bodily movements (other than the muscular contraction to be 
recorded) will not cause deflection of the recording needle. 

If the definition given of coordination as a muscular reaction 
serving the aim of the movement with a minimum of waste of 
energy, is correct, it follows that this reaction will change with 
the speed of the movement, because as the speed changes, the 
work done changes also, and consequently demands a change in 
muscular reaction, if this is to retain its maximal efficiency. This 
change may take place in either of two ways ; the same muscles 
may contract more forcibly, thus increasing the output of work, 
or the muscular reaction may spread to adjoming muscles. If the 
first be the case, then we may rightfully speak of a fixed muscular 
reaction to any defiboite movement regardless of its speed. In earlier 
chapters the effect of range on coordination has already been 
pointed out. It was shown that as the range increases new muscles 
are brought into play, and that all movements of reasonable range, 
involve quite a transition of muscular activity, so that the com- 
bination of muscles functioning at the end of a movement is 
frequently quite different from those initiating the movement. 
We have now to determine whether speed has a similar effect. 
Let us assume an arm-weight at five pounds. This is to be moved 
through a distance of two feet in one second, and the work is 
done by a certain group of muscles. To move the same weight 



COOEDINATIOIT and INCOOEDINATION 107 

through, the same distance in half the time will require twice the 
force, and the additional force must be balanced at appropriate 
points by a spread of tension in order to give fixed fulcra to the 
contraction. The presence of this spread with any increase in force, 
has already been pointed out. It may also be readily inferred 
from the nature, size, and positions of the muscles themselves. 
If force variations depended solely upon intensity of contraction, 
large muscles would be superfluous, since the small muscles could 
do the necessary work by a more forceful contraction. Both 
anatomy and physiology show clearly that this is not true. The 
correlation between forceful movements and large muscles, light 
movements and small muscles is a fact recognized by aU physio- 
logists. Accordingly, as the force increases we may expect to find 
the larger muscles contributing more and more to the movement. 



Fig. 33. 

The pectoralis major is one such, muscle. It is the most powerful 
of the arm adductors and its contraction is very noticeable in 
such potential movements as that represented by pressing the 
hands together firmly in front of the chest. But it is not the only 
adductor, and hence does not contract for all movements of adduc- 
tion. The slower movements of this t37pe do not require the force 
demanded by rapid movements. 

Fig. 33 shows the efl^ect of speed upon the contraction of the 
pectoralis major. The movement recorded was a lateral shift of two 
octaves, from C3 to middle C, with the player seated in the normal 
position before the keyboard. In record a, the movement was made 
in one second, necessitating a very slow arm movement. In *6, 
the movement was made in three-fourths of a second ; in c, in 
one-half ; in d, in one-quarter ; and e, in one-eighth of a second. 



108 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

No contraction is noticeable in a. In 6 tbe contraction is slight and 
extends through an appreciable time interval, shown by the hori- 
zontal distance covered before the line drops back to the relaxation 
point. In c the contraction is more marked, and of less duration, 
a relationship shown more clearly in d and e. (Minor variations 
in these curves should not be used for interpretation since, in all 
probability they were caused by slight bodily movements and 
minute, undesirable fluctuations in the air pressure of the recording 
tambour.) Since in all cases the rauge and the direction of move- 
ment remained constant, and only the speed varied, the changes 
in the muscular reaction result from these speed variations. The 
greater the speed, hence the force required to produce the speed, 
the more is the work done by larger, more basically situated muscles. 
Moreover, the type of muscular reaction changes also. When the 
muscle begins to take part in the movement, its contraction is 
relatively slow and is maintained somewhat. Wken the speed of 
movement increases beyond this point the muscle contracts more 
forcibly, but also more quickly and this degree of contraction is 
not maintained. That explains the peaks in Fig. 33d, e, compared 
to the plateaux in 6 and c of the same figure. The mechanical and 
coordinative reason for this is explained on p. 104. It enables 
the organism to do the same work with less expenditure of energy. 

Accordingly, as the speed of movement increases, the muscular 
contraction assumes more and more the nature of a twitch (not 
in a strict physiological sense, for all voluntary movement is 
tetanic in character) or “ whipped ” effect and the relaxation that 
follows almost immediately, causes the arm to travel as a relatively 
free body, given its maximum impetus at the beginning of the 
movement. We have here the explanation of the Schleuder and 
Wwrf‘Bewegungen which play such an important part in modern 
German piano pedagogy. 

This effect of speed is noticeable in any movement the muscular 
contraction of which can be adequately observed. It explains, 
for instance, why the carpal extensors cannot be felt to contract 
until the extension of the hand is done rapidly, or why the flexors 
of the wrist contract only if the extension of the fingers be rapid. 
When these movements are made slowly the contraction may con- 
sume more time, hence the need of maximal contraction is not 
present. The tendons therefore, will not “snap’^ into a taut 
position and their contraction will not be noticeable. And besides, 
unless the force required to move the mass within the given time 
be suflSiciently great, these fore-arm muscles may not contract at 
all. The mechanical need for such shifts in muscular reaction with 



COOEDINATION and INCOOEDINATION 109 

variations in tte force of movement is explained in tte cliapter 
om Action and Eeaction.- Tiie effects we are here studying are speed 
effects, but variations in speed, so long as mass remains constant 
are variations in force. 

But a free body, as here understood, would be an uncontrolled 
body. Therefore, toward the end of the movement, a compensatory 
or modifying reaction must take place in order to lead the movement 
to the desired goal. And the same muscle that contracts in order 
to initiate a movement, will contract also to inhibit another move- 
ment in the opposite direction. If the pectoralis major contracts 
to bring the arm rapidly toward the body, it must contract also to 
stop the rapidly outgoing arm. This contraction is shown in 
Fig. 34. The niovement made was the reverse of that used in 
Fig. 33. The shift made was from middle C to C3, at a high velocity, 
and was purposely brought to an abrupt stop ; that is to say, 
the original impetus given to the arm was considerably more than 
that required to bring the arm up to the stopping point, three- 
lined C. The movement had to be inhibited in order to keep the 
hand from passing beyond this point. When this inhibition is 


Fig. 34. 

absent, and the “thrown” arm is allowed to travel on freely, 
until its own length and gravity change the direction of movement 
to a fall, the contraction of the muscle is absent. It is likewise absent 
if the hand or arm be allowed to strike an outside obstacle, such as 
a cushion. In this case one must be very careful to avoid any 
inhibition which the knowledge of the presence of an obstacle 
will naturally produce through the fear of pain, and must let the 
arm fly entirely freely against the obstacle. Fig. 34a, shows the 
contraction of the pectoralis major when voluntary inhibition takes 
place ; 6, the absence of contraction when the force of the move- 
ment is allowed to expend itself freely, or against an obstacle. 
Eight strokes were made, four with muscular inhibition and four 
against an outside obstacle, in this case a cushion placed at the 
point where the movement ended. The muscular contractions 
for the four voluntarily inhibited strokes are seen clearly; the 
arrows point to the four free strokes, where, it there had been 
muscular contraction it would have deflected the recording point 
similarly to the four points in a. Under the first arrow a sli^t 
deflection is still noticeable, caused by a fear reaction against the 



no ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

imaged pain from striking an obstacle forcibly. Tbe el imin ation 
of such a contraction must be assured, and at times requires con- 
siderable practice. 

The purpose of the contraction of this muscle, namely, i^bition 
of the movements, is revealed also by the time at which it occurs. 
When the contraction initiates a movement it obviously occurs 
at the beginning ; when it retards a movement of any appreciable 
duration, it occurs after the beginning. In Fig. 35 the duration 



c* 


CL 

— Vv/- 


key 

. c* 


b 

•muscL € 

V 

w 


Fig. 35. 


of movement is shown between the two deflections in the key-line. 
In a, the muscular contraction coincides with the beginning of 
movement since it causes the movement ; in 6, on the other hand, 
it inhibits the movement and, accordingly, occurs near the end of 
the stroke. 

This manner of muscular contraction is independent of the 
direction in which the movement occurs. The lower part of the 


AA/VXAAAAAAAAAAAA 




36 . 

pectoralis major acts as a depressor of the arm. Hence, by holding 
the pneumatic tambour against the tendon we can record its con- 
traction for arm-descent. When a chord is played fortissimo, 
the arm is forced down, the action of gravity being insufficient, 
within the range of movement, to produce the desired velocity. 
Fig. 36 shows at what part of the stroke the contraction of the 
pectoralis major takes place in such a vertical arm-stroke. In 
this particular record sixteen one-hxmdredths of a second elapse 



COOEDINATION and incoordination 111 

between tte contraction of tlie muscle and the depression of the 
piano-key. Moreover, muscular relaxation has already set in by 
the time the key is reached. This is in agreement with the contrac- 
tion in lateral arm-movement and points to the initial contraction 
as typical in all rapid movements. 




If this be true we may expect to find the time-relationship 
present also in finger-strokes. These strokes being of considerably 
less range than the arm-strokes just considered, make the actual 
time between the contraction of the muscle and the end of the 
stroke proportionately less. But if the recording be made sufi&ciently 
sensitive as to time, the difierences may be seen. 



wvwwv 

Fig. 38. 

In the figures here given the contraction of the deep flexor 
of the fingers (flexor profundis digitorum) was recorded. This 
muscle is one of the chief finger-flexors, and its tendon as it passes 
the wrist is sufficiently superficial to permit recording by the instru- 
ment shown in Fig. 29. The end of the stroke was recorded by an 
electric contact. Before illustrating the time-relationships, I 
include Fig. 37 showing two types of contraction of this muscle, 



112 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

highly magnified. The curves are lettered according to the speed 
of finger-descent, a, slow, 6, very rapid. As the speed is increased 
th.e sustained contraction is replaced by the familiar “ twitch 
followed by a pronounced relaxation. 

Fig. 38 illustrates the relationship between this initial contraction, 
and the end of the finger-stroke. The upper line in the figure 
shows the muscle contractions, the deflection in the lower line 
shows the end of the finger-stroke. Accordingly, in the movements 
here recorded approximately from two- to three-fiftieths of a second 
elapsed between the maximum muscular contraction and the end 
of the stroke. The difierence is very small, but some difference 
was found in all cases. The principle deduced for arm-movements, 
therefore, holds for finger-movements as well. And in these two 
physiological units, the whole-arm and the finger, we have the largest 
and smallest playing-units used in piano technique. Time-relation- 
ship between muscular contraction and duration of stroke may, 
therefore, be considered a basic element of coordination. 

The observations on the large muscles with movements of wide 
range can be made without the use of recording apparatus, by 
placing the non-moving hand firmly against the muscle the con- 
traction of which is to be observed. Care must be taken, however, 
against altering the movement by directing the attention to the 
expected contraction. For this reason the observation is better 
made by a person other than the one making the movement itself. 
But the time interval and the range of the smaller movements 
are much too small to be detected by general observation. Here 
recording apparatus is needed. 

Thus far we may formulate as prmciples of coordination : — 

(1) The time-relationship between the muscular reaction and 
the duration of a movement is not a constant. 

(2) Muscular contraction does not parallel the range of move- 
ment as speed increases. The faster the movement, the more 
does the muscular contraction approach an initial maximal 
“ twitch ” followed by relaxation. 

(3) In all fast movements covering the greater part of the range 
of movement at any joint, the moving part traverses a part of the 
distance relatively free from muscular action. 

Force Effects. 

Since all pianistic effects are secured through variations in speed 
and force, it is necessary to investigate the effects of intensity 
upon coordinated and incoordinated movements. The speed 
effects which we have just considered in themselves point the way 



COORDINATION AND INCOORDINATION 113 

to intensity effects, because variations in either factor influence 
directly the other. An increase in speed, if the mass remains 
constant, results in an increase in force ; and conversely, an increase 
in force, with constant mass, results in an increase in speed. We 
cannot, therefore, vary one without varying the other. There are 
certain phases of the problem, however, that can be better explained 
by a separate analysis. 

Chief among these is the spread of activity with an increase 
of force, characteristic of all coordinated movements. The 
mechanical reason for such a spread of muscular activity is readily 
seen. Muscles do their best work along the middle of their range 
of action. Extreme contraction, when it does not actually injure 
the muscle or tear its tendon, does not permit the muscle to act 
at its greatest mechanical advantage. The function of the larger 
muscles of the body is not only to move the larger limbs, but also 
to aid in other forceful movements. Inertia, and resistance of 
flesh and tissue fix the joints passively up to a certain resistance. 
When more resistance is needed, muschlar contraction at the joiats 
occurs, fixing them actively against the increase in resistance 
demanded. Two views are possible. One that each muscle contracts 
until it exerts its maximal force, whereupon adjoining, more 
basically situated, larger muscles contract in turn, each waiting 
for maximal contraction of its predecessor before taking part in 
the movement. The other view is that the spread to other muscles 
takes place before maximal contraction of any one muscle is reached. 
The latter view agrees more closely with the facts. 

What happens is this : As the intensity or resistance to be over- 
come increases, the parts of the body are so shifted that the force 
acts at the most advantageous part of the leverage system. When, 
for example, the entire body is suspended by the flexors of the 
fingers, as in hanging from a horizontal bar, the wrist is in line with 
the arm and the bar so held that it acts most directly against the 
first interphalangeal joint itself. Thus tissues and above aU the 
skeletal structure is opposed to the force, which considerably 
lessens the strain on the muscles. When a chord on the piano is 
played fortissimo, the hand is so held, as we shall see later, that 
the direction of key-resistance is toward the hand-knuclde itself, 
with a tendency to push the bone-ends together. This gives 
maximal strength to the movement without maximal contraction 
of the muscles of the fingers, which, in themselves, would be too 
weak to produce the desired intensity. The larger muscles of the 
arm step in and take over the task, while the sm^er hand-muscles 
place the finger-bones in such a position that when the blow is 



114 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

struck tke resistance -will spend itself against tke finger-joints tkem- 
selves, that is to say, the skeletal part of the structure, so far as 
possible. (See Pigs. 186 and 187&.) 

The spread of activity to other muscles as the intensity of the 
movement varies is not restricted to any particular type of move- 
ment or group of muscles but is a characteristic of coordination 
itself. We find it in the spread from finger to hand muscles, as the 
resistance against the fingers is increased ; from the small supinator 
to the biceps with an iucrease of resistance against supination ; 
and from biceps to pectoralis major as resistance to elbow flexion 
is ncrea .ed. But we may not conclude from this that the spread 
takes place only after maximal contraction of the preceding muscle 
has been completed, because the spread is frequently for purposes 
of joint-fiixation. Thus I found, in the lateral shift along the key- 
board, toward its centre, that the biceps continued to contract 
further, after the pectoralis major had begun to contract. That is 
because the pectoralis has nothing to do directly with flexing 
the elbow (since its tendon does not cross the elbow-joint), but fixes 
the position of the humerus, so that, when the biceps contract 
more strongly, the humerus will not be pulled out of position. 
The mechanical principle at work here is more carefully analysed 
under Action and Eeaction. The spread is normally toward the 
fundamental (larger) muscles, never the reverse. 

A coordinated movement, therefore, considered in its force or 
intensity phase, is one in which the parts of the body involved act 
at the best mechanical advantage. As the force of the movement 
increases, the direction-relationships of the various parts of the 
body change. A hand-position, for example, adequate and efficient 
for a soft tone degree, may be entirely inadequate for the production 
of a much louder tone. In order for the finger-t.p to exert its 
full force upon the key the extensors of the wrist must contract 
to prevent the upward movement of the wrist. The extent of this 
wrist-ascent determines the amount of force lost at the finger-tip. 
A few examples from general observation may be mentioned. In 
pressing against resistance in front of the body, the arms are held 
straight in front, not bent at the elbows. The resistance thus 
pushes against a straight line of bone into the shoulder socket. 
In the tug of war, the body assumes as nearly as possible a straight- 
line position so that the entire skeleton is opposed to the resistance. 
In putting the shoulder to the wheel ”, trunk and legs are in one 
line, thus gaming maxitnal mechanical advantage for the skeletal 
parts. In piano-playing such effects are not so readily observed 
because the movements are much finer. The subsequent chapters, 



COORDINATION AND INCOORDINATION 115 

however, will furnish ample proof that the same principle operates 
in playing. 

This shifting of parts in order to secure maximal mechanical 
advantage with minimal muscular expenditure is entirely in agree- 
ment with the definition of coordination already given. And 
conversely, an incoordinated movement considered in its intensity 
aspect, is one in which the parts of the body involved do not assume 
the best mechanical relationships. 

As the intensity of a movement increases, therefore, the individual 
muscles acting do not necessarily do so at their maximal strength. 
The change in the spatial position of the bones relieves the muscles 
of this necessity. If this were not so, then the small finger muscles 
would have to be able to withstand the effect of the most powerful 
contraction of the large shoulder muscles. It would then be an 
application of the principle that a chain is merely as strong as its 
weakest link. Since whatever force the shoulder muscles create 
must be transmitted to the piano-key through the fingers, no single 
joint can be relaxed to a point less than the value of this force. 

The fallacy of constant isolation is thus once again shown, the 
amount of relative isolation varying with each change in the force 
of the movement. 

Range, 

The shift of muscular activity varies, further, with the range of 
the movement. The extensors of the fimgers, when finger extension 
has reached its maximum, bend the wrist backward (dorsal flexion) ; 
the extensor of the elbow is followed by the rear adductors of the 
humerus, when the movement is extensive ; the deep flexor of the 
finger (flex. prof, dig.) flexes first the third phalanx, and then 
as the range of movement increases it flexes in turn, the second 
and the first phalanx, and finally the wrist. This spread of move- 
ment results from the passage of the tendon over the iatervening 
joints and is a mechanical necessity. The mechanical arm described 
in the chapter on Relaxation illustrates the muscular action very 
positively. If the string corresponding to the deep flexor of the 
fiboLger be pulled slightly, it flexes the nail joint ; if the pull continues 
it flexes the middle fiiger joint, then the hand-knuclde and finally 
the wrist. 

Moreover, the multiplicity of function, as a result of which 
one muscle acts in various ways, affects the range of movement. 
Observations made upon the biceps, which flexes the elbow and 
supmates the fore-arm seem to indicate that when only one of 
these motions is made the other is not simply eliminated, but is 



116 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT . 

prevented by appropriate contraction of the antagonistic muscles. 
That is to say, if only flexion at the elbow be desired supination 
will be prevented by contraction of the pronating muscles, in this 
case the pronator teres. If the movement be extended to cover 
both supination and flexion, the contraction of the pronator is 
absent. If this conclusion be correct, it seems to support the theory 
of all-or-none action of muscle. The entire biceps contracts in 
either case, but the effect of its supinating part is neutralized by 
antagonistic contraction elsewhere. This part of the biceps, 
accordingly, is not in a state of relaxation. The line of action of 
a muscle is determined not by the muscle itseff but by the position 
of the points of origin and insertion. Since these for any one muscle 
are fixed, it is scarcely possible that variations in the line of action 
can result from the contraction of only a part of the muscle. 

The neutralization of the undesirable part of the action by 
contraction of the antagonistic muscles naturally results in a certain 
amomt of fixation, and is further evidence that a coordioated move- 
ment is by no means necessarily a relaxed one. Whatever contrac- 
tion of antagonistic muscle-groups is present is that much hyper- 
tension, but this, as a whole, remains coordinated. A similar 
condition exists in the relationship between the finger extensors 
and the wrist flexors ; and between the finger flexors and wrist 
extensors. In a forceful finger-stroke, for example, the ascent of 
the wrist is prevented by the contraction of the muscles that lift 
the hand backward at the wrist. The tendons of the finger- 
flexors likewise pass the wrist, and, as a result, fixation of the 
wrist occurs, commensurate with the force desired at the finger-tip. 
This iateraction of forces is explained m Chapter VII, under Action 
and Eeaction. 

External Resistance, 

Finally we have to consider what happens to a coordination 
when a moving part of the body strikes an obstacle. A simple 
case of this kind is offered by the finger-key impact, and in order 
to simplify the mechanical analysis, we shall consider the key 
immovable. This unnatural condition, as we shall see, in no 
way interferes with the mechanical principle involved. 

If the analysis of tonus and relaxation be correct, and if, when 
the descending finger strikes the obstacle, additional force be 
acting upon the latter, there must be corresponding relaxation in 
the antagonistic muscles in any coordinated movement. As an 
illustration : If the finger strike -^e key with a force of 70 (assuming 
the total tonus value at 100) then the antagonists will be acting 



. COORDINATION* AND INCOORDINATION 117 

witL. a force of 30. If, after key impact an additional force of 
10 be exerted upon tbe key, there must be a corresponding decrease 
in force in the antagonistic muscles, which will then act with a force 
of 20. And since there has been no movement for the additional 
10 units of force, the other 10 will represent so much slack or loose- 
ness. When the 10 units of downward acting force are released, 
the antagonistic muscles will take up their 10 units of slack, but 
there will be no actual finger-lift. This begins only after the 10 
units of contraction have been covered. At liis point the resistance 
of the finger-weight is introduced and results in a momentary 
jerk in the muscular contraction. After this point the contraction 
is smooth, since no new and sudden resistance is met during finger 
ascent. 

This may be demonstrated as follows : Place the right hand 
upon a table and raise the elbow sufficiently to bend the hand 
backward at the wrist about thirty degrees. Now lift the third 
finger. Its tendon will contract and will form an easily visible 
ridge along the back of the hand. (See Pig. 31, showing tins ridge.) 
Place the forefinger of the left hand firmly upon this about an inch 
in front of the wrist. Now let the lifted finger descend slowly. 
The tendon will relax. When the finger-tip reaches the table 
continue to press firmly against the table with the tip of the third 
finger. The tendon may then be pushed to either side. Now 
release the pressure upon the table, whereupon the tendon can be 
felt to “ sMe ” back into a straight-liae position and not until then 
does finger-lift begin. If, before this point has been reached, 
the pressure upon the tendon has been maintained at an angle, 
the tendon will be felt to slide along under the finger-tip, from the 
side, until its straight-line position has been reached. With the 
finger lifted, though not moving, it is not possible to push the tendon 
to either side appreciably, ^s is the looseness or slack ” to 
which I have referred. The greater the pressure against the fixed 
obstacle, the greater is this ‘‘ looseness ”. 

A similar test can be made with the tendon of the elbow flexor. 
With the fore-arm resting horizontally upon a table in the supinated 
position (palm of the hand up), and a considerable weight in the 
hand so as to emphasize the contraction of the muscles, raise the 
hand. The tendon of the biceps muscle (which is a flexor of the 
elbow in the supinated position) will be seen to rise in the bend of 
the elbow. Take this tendon between the fingers and thumb of the 
left hand, and pudi it toward one side, not too strongly. So long 
as the weight is held in the lifted hand, the contraction of the tendon 
will not permit its position to be changed easily. Now let the hand 



118 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

return to tlie table, and rest as before. The tendon will be 
felt to relax, and, when the arm is resting firmly upon the table, 
may readily be pushed aside. Once again prepare to lift the weight 
very slowly from the table by elbow flexion. The flexor-tendon 
will be felt to contract before the fore-arm begins to move. Suppose 
the fore-arm to weigh two pounds. A contraction sufficient to move 
one pound will, therefore, not move the fore-arm. As a matter 
of fact, the moment contraction begins work is being done, but in 
insufficient quantity to produce the desired effect. This may be 
seen by resting the fore-arm, volar side up, upon an appropriate 
balance. Then, just as soon as contraction of the tendon occurs, 
the balance wiE register a withdrawal of weight. The arm cannot 
leave the surface of the balance until the latter registers zero. 
Then the arm-lift, unsupported, begins. In the case of the balance 
as a rest, we cannot properly speak of looseness, because the resting 
surface actually ascends with the arm from the very beginning of 
weight-withdrawal. In the case of a firm rest, however, we have 
the condition of muscular contraction and no movement — 
a characteristic of incoordination since it produces “ slack 

Since coordination means the muscular response doing a requhed 
amount of work in a given time with least waste of energy, the state 
of contraction of a muscle is independent of the mere position of 
the skeletal parts it moves. If the fore-arm be lifted with the hand 
canying an additional weight, a greater muscular contraction wiU 
obviously be necessary to bring the hand into a desired position, 
than would be required to bring it into the same position without 
the weight. Both movements may be equally well coordinated, 
in spite of the possibly marked difference in muscular response. 
Here neither the range, nor speed, determines the muscular reaction, 
which is the result of the resistance to be overcome. 

Moreover, the definition of coordination as minimal expenditure 
of energy for the end in view, determines also the range at which 
the movements will occur. In the study of the anatomical structure 
the increase of physiological resistance as the extremes of the rauge 
are approached was pointed out (p. 15 ff.). To overcome this added 
resistance will require additional energy, which, since it serves 
merely to overcome superfluous resistance, is itself wasted work. 
Consequently a coordinated movement is a movement which permits 
the joints involved to act as near to their mid-range of action as 
possible. 

By keeping my fore-arm stationary, I can, with fuUy extended 
third feger, by abducting and adducting the hand at the wrist 
(see Fig. 14, Horizontal Movements) move my finger-tip through 



COOEDINATION AED INCOOEDINATIOE 119 

eleven inclies. But the movement, through at least two inches at 
each end, is awkward. I can move the finger through the same 
distance much more readily by adding upper-arm abduction or 
humerus rotation, or a little of each. In coordinated movements 
the avoidance of the extremes of range is responsible for the shift 
of muscular action as the movement continues. It also explains 
why, in practically all pianistic movements, motion at more than 
one joint takes place. 

Large and Small Muscles. 

It is at times possible to make the same movement by various 
muscles, and the question naturally arises as to which, in such a 
case, would be considered the coordinated and which the inco- 
ordinated movement. For example, in a short lateral shift of the 
hand, let us say of half an octave, should the movement be made 
by ab- and adduction of the wrist, slight extension and flexion 
of the elbow w th humerus rotation, or slight abduction of the upper 
arm ? The question cannot be answered definitely because ipo 
much depends upon the precise nature and aim of the lateral shift, 


39 . 

and upon preceding and succeeding movements. However, the 
principle holds that : Kapid movements and movements of small 
range are naturally adapted to the smaller muscles and joints, 
powerful movements and movements of wide range are adapted 
to the larger muscles and joints. It is true that large muscles are 
by no means lacking in the power to control fine movements. 
Fig. 39 is an example of writing when an ordinary fountain-pen 
is attached to the elbow. This necessitates writing with the upper 
arm entirely, yet, without any preliminary practice, the large shoulder 
muscles could control the strokes sufficiently to make the words 
readily legible. (Fig. 39 is approximately one-half the size of 
the original.) 

The fact remains, however, that the work can be more 
economically and accurately done with the finer finger muscles. 
Largely, perhaps, because one element of coordinated movement 
is proper time. And so soon as a large mass is moved m various 
directions rapidly, the inevitable factors of inertia and momentum 
place the movement in the incoordinated class. 



120 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

Eapidly repeated movements, the chief characteristics of which 
are speed and reversal of direction, play a prominent part in pianistic 
movements. In keeping with the principle outlined in the preceding 
paragraph, they should be played with the smallest parts of the arm. 
Staccato octaves, of weak or moderate intensity should be played 
from the wrist, using the hand as the moving part. If played from 
the elbow, the fore-arm weight is added to that of the hand and each 
change of direction must be accompanied by a proportionately 
greater muscular inhib ition. The problems are frequently 
complicated by other considerations : ease of reach, the character 
of the preceding and succeeding passages, and the dynamic grada- 
tions ; but basically a movement requiring a rapid change of direction 
in the playing part should be made with as light a moving part 
as possible. It is for this reason that rapid arm-leaps with reversal 
of direction are so dfficult : The necessary inhibition of momentum 
interferes with the freedom of the movement. This point briugs 
up the interesting question of whether the pianistic vibrato touch 
should be classed as an incoordinated or a coordinated movement. 
(See Chapter XVI, under Vibrato.) 

Time Relatiomhip. 

The economy of energy characteristic of all coordinated move- 
ments demands also that the agogic sequence of the parts of the 
movement, the time-relationship, among the various phases of the 
movement, be those of least waste of effort. Among other things 
this means that the contraction of a muscle should not continue 
after the , work of the original contraction has been done. In piano- 
pla 3 dng sustained contraction has at times a physiological value, 
but no mechanical or tonal advantage. On the string instruments, 
such as the violin, sustained contraction plays a most important 
part. Most movements of piano technique are rapid contractions 
followed by periods of relaxation. The ratio between the time of 
contraction and the time of relaxation is one measure of coordinated 
movement. In fact, I am inclined to believe that the readiness 
with which relaxation sets in between movements, be they move- 
ments of fingers, hand, or arm, is a fair index of kinesthetic talent 
as applied to the piano. At any rate I have always found, in 
watching the playing of technically talented, though pianistically 
untrained students, that a very nicely adjusted relaxation is always 
present immediately after tone-production. The opposite of this 
is an accepted fact : The sustained contraction (useless stiff- 
ness) of untalented pupils is pianistically undesirable. But the 
relaxation following tone-production has frequently, but erroneously, 



COORDINATION AND INCOORDINATION 121 

been supposed to exist during tone-production as well, and bas given 
rise to a pedagogy of tone-production tbat robs the player’s style 
of much force, velocity, and brilHance. A coordinated movement, 
considered in its time phase, is one in which the muscular contraction 
is of as short duration as possible in view of the desired effect. 



I’m. 40. 


In Rig. 40 is shown an example of a well-coordinated movement 
At the beginning of the stroke the muscles opposing key-resistance 
(in this case the flexor carpi radialis) are not contracted xmtil the 
key-resistance is met. The descent of the aim to key-level was done 



IlG. 41. 


with a relaxed hand. The latter became fixed just before key- 
contact, in order to meet the key-resistance effectively. (See also 
Fig. 107.) 

Compare this with the two records of Fig. 41. These represent 
incoordinated movements, as made by two xmtalented pupils. 



122 ASPECTS OF PHSYIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

In tlie first record, muscnlar contraction took place but it was 
opposed by sunultaneous contraction of tbe antagonists. As a 
result, tbe original flexor contraction went for naugbt, since tbe 
key was not depressed at all. Tbe key-surface was just about 
touched, bence tbe noinute break in tbe key-line at tbe arrow. 
At b in F^. 41, tbe muscle contracts long in advance of tbe key- 
contact, and remains contracted well after key-release. All of 
this premature contraction and tbe post-prolongation thereof, 
are wasted effort, not only producing no useful effect, but also 
seriously restricting other phases of movement. 

This time-relationship of a coordinated movement may therefore 
be stated as follows : lie contraction of a muscle should take place 
a moment before, or upon tbe introduction of tbe resistance which 
tbe muscle has to overcome. It should cease not later than removal 
of tbe resistance. 

Antagonists and Synergies. 

Antagonistic muscles are those whose actions are in mechani- 
cal opposition: If one muscle flexes tbe elbow, for example, 
its antagonist extends tbe elbow. Synergistic muscles are 
those acting at tbe same time in the production of move- 
ment. Tbe term is sometimes restricted to tbe muscles aiding 
tbe principal muscle, but, since this distinction cannot 
always readily be made, I prefer to extend tbe definition to aU 
muscles helping to produce tbe movement. Even so tbe classifica- 
tion is not always fixed. A muscle acting synergistically with 
regard to another muscle may act antagonistically to tbe same 
muscle in another movement. This probably never happens in 
motion in a single plane, that of a hinge-joint, but it frequently 
takes place at tbe rotary joints, and results from tbe fact that tbe 
change in tbe direction of tbe skeletal parts results in a change 
in tbe direction of tbe pull, since tbe origin of tbe muscle is fixed. 

Tbe reality of muscular antagonism can be experimentally 
shown in tbe case, for example, of a spinal animal, that is one from 
which tbe brain has been careMy removed. Here any movement 
is necessarily a spinal reflex. Under such conditions tbe stimulation 
of one set of muscles wiU be accompanied by relaxation in tbe 
antagonists. This relationship forms tbe basis of coordinated 
movement, and at tbe same time points out tbe reflex character 
of coordination, a fact that makes it unwise to attempt tbe teaching 
of a movement by calling attention to the actual muscles used. 
We do not, in ordinary use, feel or will tbe particular contraction. 



COOEDINATION and INCOOEDENATIOIT 123 

If tlie proper resistance is present the proper contraction, in normal 
cases, will follow as a mechanical necessity. The fact that many 
nntalented pupils do not adopt the proper muscular adjustment 
is an indication of subnormality in this respect. There are individual 
‘variations in the sensitivity and adaptation of the kinesthetic 
sense just as real as individual differences in vision or audition ; 
of this the various ataxias give unmistakable evidence. 



CHAPTEE X 


Eelaxation 

II 

The close interrelationship between coordination and relaxation 
is evident from the analysis of coordination in Chapter IX. It 
makes a separate treatment of relaxation awkward, yet there are 
certain phases of the question which remain to be pointed out. 
These are the result of experimentation -with a mechanical arm. 
I cannot urge too strongly the use of such an instrument : it reveals 
in a striking manner many widely accepted fallacies of the mechanics 
of arm-movement. 

The criticism 'will immediately be made that such an instrument 
does not reproduce at all the complex physiological mechanics 
of the arm itself, hence its study cannot lead to practical conclusions. 
The premise is true enough, but not the conclusion. Since the 
joints of the fingers, wrist, and elbow are all hinge-joints, some 
entirely, and others primarily, a mechanical arm with hinge-joints 
reproduces faithfully the simple mechanics of the movement. A 
model of such an arm is shown in Fig. 42. Moreover, by attaching 
appropriate cords to the parts corresponding to the insertions of 
the tendons, and by approximating the lines of muscular pull, 
a study of muscular action may be made which is very helpful 
in the analysis of movement and joint-fixation. In the model 
here used, set screws at each joint permitted any degree of fixation, 
and the fact that such fixation produced the same results as fixation 
with the pull of antagonistic muscles is proof that immobility of 
joints is necessary to produce certain effects at the finger-tip. 

Behxation and Arm-Position, 

Any position of the fore-arm, other than the vertical position 
at the side of the body, demands fixation of the humerus, so long 
as no part of the arm or hand rests upon a fixed point. This is the 
work of the shoulder muscles. If the humerus moves, the elbow 
necessarily moves. The fore-arm, in turn, is held in position by 
contraction of the muscles in the upper arm. Position of the back 
of the hand is fixed by contraction of the muscles in the fore-arm ; 
position of the hungers is fixed by muscles in the fore-arm and in 
the hand. Without this contraction the arm would hang limply 
at the side of the body. The mechanical arm, with all joints 
relaxed, lies horizontally on its base-board. If picked up at any 

124 



» ' 


Plate VIII 



Fig. 42. A Mechanical Arm, showing effect of relaxation on joint-position. 


[To facep. 134 





EELAXATION 


125 


point both sides approach a vertical in much the same manner 
as the Imks of a flexible chain. Erom these observations we may 
deduce as a first principle of controlled movement : 

In order to maintain a joint at a given position in space, without 
external resistance at this point or at any intervening point, all 
other joints between this point and the trunk must be fixed to an 
extent sufficient to overcome the weight of the intervening parts. 
The shoulder supports the entire arm, the elbow supports the fore- 
arm and hand, the wrist supports the hand, and so on. And, 
since in all controlled movements some retention of position is 
necessary, relaxation in any pianistic touch-form is relative, being 
accompanied by a perceptible degree of fixation at all times. 

When resistance is introduced at the finger-tip, so that this 
pomt, and some other point such as the shoulder become fixed, 
then relaxation in any siugle joint between these points of fixation 
will not affect the arm-position. Thus the mechanical arm, if any 
one joint is relaxed, but all others remain fixed, will not change its 
position at all. It does not follow, therefore, that movement at 
a joint will necessarily foUow relaxation at that joint. 

The spatial position of the parts changes radically, however, 
as soon as more than one joint is simultaneously relaxed. It makes 
no difference which two or more are relaxed. In each case the 
position of the parts is changed, and the form of this alteration, 
as well as its extent, depend upon the particular joints relaxed. 
In A of Fig. 42 the filrst (i) and second (y) interphalangeal joints 
are relaxed. As a result the nail-joint (i) breaks in In B 
of the same figure the hand-knuckle (i) and the wrist (1) are relaxed, 
whereupon the hand-knuckle sinks. In 0, the wrist (I) and the 
shoulder (n) are relaxed and the arm part between the two, drops. 
The relaxed joints, therefore, need not be adjacent, one or more 
fixed joints may intervene, but movement occurs just the same. 
As soon as one of the two relaxed joints is fixed, however, all move- 
ment stops. Needless to say, in the illustrations the finger-tip 
(A) is fiLxed only in a vertical plane, movement in the other joints, 
pulls Ti toward n sli^tly. The spring-balance shows nicely an 
increase in weight at the finger-tip as the relaxed joint is shifted 
away from the fibnger, thus increasing the weight of the fixed part 
between the relaxed joint and the finger-tip. This weight increase 
is, among other things, proportional to the weight of the part of 
the arm between the relaxed joint and the finger-tip. 

A second principle of relaxation thus becomes : 

In order merely to maintain the finger-tip in a fixed position 
upon a key, not more than one joint may be in full relaxation 



126 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

between this point and tbe sboulder-girdle. All otter joints must 
be fixed at least to tte point necessary to overcome tte weight of 
the intervening parts. 

This means that the mere “ resting ” of the arm upon the keys 
by means of the finger-tip, with the one exception of the purely 
vertical position, is not a relaxed arm-condition at all but one of 
mild fixation, most probably in all joints. It is equivalent to 
the difference between the free arm-drop and the controlled arm 
descent described in a later chapter. Moreover, the mechanical 
arm shows the direction that movements take when excess relaxation 
is present. I have several times referred to the fixation of the 
shoulder to keep the elbow sufficiently forward, thus preventing 
the hand from being pulled away from the keyboard. If the joint 
n, Fig. 42, which corresponds to the shoulder-joint, be relaxed, 
m-w drops to a vertical, thus pulling h and the ntervening joints 
away from their present position toward n. On the keyboard this 
would pull the finger-tip from the key. Every playing position in 
which the upper arm is in any but a vertical position demands 
some fixation at the shoulder socket in order to keep the upper 
arm from dropping to a vertical position at the side of the body. 
Thus the contraction of shoulder muscles is present in practically 
aU playing, since the vertical humerus position is of negligible 
frequency in piano technique. On the other hand, if the problem 
be the teaching of a relaxed ’’ arm, the vertical position near the 
side of the body is preferable to a position with laterally extended 
elbow. In the former the shoulder is naturally relaxed, having 
no active mechanical work to do ; in the latter it carmot be 
completely relaxed because it has to maintain the position of the 
elbow against the action of gravity. 

Fixation. 

The mere maintenance of position according to the second 
principle just stated does not mean that work will be done at the 
^ger-tip. With the finger-tip resting upon the key, the finger 
joints fixed and the hand-knuckle relaxed, the force exerted upon 
the key wih.be a part of the weight of the finger. This is a constant 
md cannot be modified without muscular contraction. We can 
increase it by shifting the point of relaxation into the wrist or 
elbow, and stiffening the hand-knuckle, but again, it will be a 
constant for either joint, once the shift is made. In order that 
more work may be done at the finger-tip, the flexors of the finger 
must contract, acting at ^ as a fulcrum, the position of h being 
fixed by the fixation at the wrist 1. On the mechanical arm this 



RELAXATION 127 

fixation may be ga 'ned by appropriate setting of the screw or tension 
of the cords representing muscular pull. The direct dependence 
of force at the finger-tip upon the rigidity of the joints of finger, 
hand, and arm is then clearly seen. With each increase in force 
the ‘‘ break ” at the joint of least fixation, other things equal, 
becomes more noticeable ; and this can be overcome only by 
tightening the set-screws or increasing the pull of the cords 
representing the muscles. Such facts have been so well known in 
mechanics that their re-statement here becomes a truism ; yet their 
absence in the doctrine of relaxation in piano-plajdng shows clearly 
that they have escaped detection. This is not surprising, because 
all such fixation is a necessary coordination ; being constantly 
present in, and varying in a fixed way with each movement. The 
fixation itself, following a fundamental law of sensation and 
perception, is not present to consciousness. Thus a third principle 
of relaxation may be stated as follows : 

In order that a force greater than the weight of the moving 
part be exerted upon the finger-tip, muscular contraction must be 
added to the weight, and the muscular contraction necessitates 
greater fixation in all joints acting as fulcra. The degree of fixation 
required is dicectly proportional to the force demanded at the 
finger-tip. 

Weight Distrilyution. 

The influence of arm-position on wei^t-distribution is mentioned 
in the chapter on We ght-Transfer. A few additional details, 
revealed when the mechanical arm is suspended in various positions 
by appropriate spring-balances, may be of interest. 

The mechanical arm here used weired approximately 35 ounces. 
With the arm horizontal and all joints fixed the vertical pull at 
the wrist in ounces was 17, at the elbow 11, and at the shoulder 7. 
With the finger flexed 90° in the hand-knuckle, the shortening of. 
the arm-length was insufficient to affect the readings. (A more 
accurate scaling showed a loss of one-fifth of an ounce at the wrist 
and a similar gain at the shoulder.) With the hand hanging 
vertically at the wrist the readings were : wrist 16, elbow 11, 
shoulder 8. With a horizontal arm (joints fixed) hanging between 
finger and shoulder the weight at the finger-tip was 16*5 and at the 
shoulder 18*5 ounces. With horizontal fore-arm and elbow-humerus 
flexion of 45°, the wei^t was ; finger, 15, shoulder 20. With 
horizontal fore-arm and vertical upper arm (hence elbow flexion 
of 90°) the weight at the finger-tip was 9, at the shoulder 26 ounces. 
By raising the wrist to 45°, and with elbow-flexion of 45° the weight 



128 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 


at the fingex-tip was increased to 18, that at the shoulder reduced 
to 17 ounces. With the wrist 45° below key level, elbow flexion 
45° as before, the finger registered 10 ounces, the shoulder 25. 
Finally with the arm straight, slanting forward and downward 45°, 
the weight at the finger was 17, at the shoulder 18 ounces. The 
absolute amounts of these measurements are of no value here, 
but the relationship among them, and the manner in which they 
vary, are the means of learning about the weight-transfer in playing. 
Fig. 43 is a diagrammatic illustration of the same mechanical 
principles which we have just measured. In the figure. A, B, D, G, 
are various positions of the arm, with f as finger-tip ; h as hand- 
knuckle; as wrist; e as elbow; 5 as shoulder; and c as the centre 
of gravity of the arm, which is just in front of the elbow. The heavy 
vertical lines show the direction of the force of gravity. The 
horizontal distances f-c and s-c are, therefore, the lever arms. 
In A the ratio of these arms is as 7 : 6 ; in B as 6*7 : 5 ; in D as 
9 : 5 ; in G as 53 : 5. Since the forces exerted at the lever ends 
are in inverse ratio to the lever arms, least force will be exerted 
at/in G, next in D, then A, and most in B. The position usually 
pictured for the ideal position of arm-relaxation with weight- 
transfer, namely, that at G, is the least adapted to this transfer 
of weight, and the position best adapted, B, is the high-wrist position 
so often frowned upon by pedagogues. It follows that the key- 
depression for arm-weight must take place in the first half of arm- 
descent, before the wrist reaches a horizontal position. The actual 
tone-production takes place with the hand and fore-arm (not the 
humerus) ^tween the positions shown in B and G. The final 
resting-position as at D, is not the position for tone-production. 
Weight is always lost with the lowering-wrist. I speak here of arm- 
weight, not the force which a contraction of the arm adductors 
can exert upon the descending arm. 

A similar condition holds for the forward shift of the shoulder. 

It is frequently stated that the player should lean s light ly forward 
so that the centre of gravity of the trunk will be brought nearer 
the keyboard and the weight thus used to better advantage. 
The shift of the centre of gravity alone does not help the weight 
one bit. In G, Fig. 43, the shoulder is directly over the elbow, 
further forward than in any of the other positions, yet the amount 
of wei^t transferred to the finger-tip is less than in any of the other 
positioi^. The only way in which the forward shift of a centre 
can afiect the key, is by stiffening all intervening parts 
sufficiently to withstand the effect of this force. The gain in such 
a position is not in its effect on weight directly, but in the improve- 




130 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

ment of the joint-position for taking care of tie reaction of tlie force 
of finger-key impact. Friction and heat are generated now, instead 
of movement. It is the skeletal-straight-line position discussed 
under coordination, in which the force spends itself against bone- 
ends instead of ag inst muscular pull. (See Plate XLIV) 

We cannot, therefore, correctly speak of mere relaxed weight- 
transfer. The force exerted upon the piano-key is not simply the 
weight of a free aim, but that resulting from an active contraction 
of muscles of fingers, hand, wrist, and elbow, plus the action of 
gravity. The nearer the shoulder is over the elbow, the less arm- 
weight can be directed to the key. The best position for directing 
the Tna-yiTTinm amount of arm-weight into the key is that shown at 
B, where the wrist is high and the upper arm at a small descending 
angle. This requires a slight incline of the trunk away from the 
keyboard. If the trunk be leaned forward, the arm-position at G 
results, which is poorest for weight-transfer. The advantage of 
the forward position is in other phases, and its universal adoption 
by pianists proves that free arm-weight is probably never used 
in actual playing but is replaced by a muscular contraction added 
to gravity. In the chapters on arm-movement this question is 
discussed in detail. 

Since this wei^t distribution is flatly opposed to the generally 
accepted arm-positions given in many treatises on weight technique, 
it is advisable to add an experiment that will enable anyone to 
verify the facts as here stated. Rest the cupped hand upon a 
balance so placed at the side of the body that the body may be 
moved forward and backward without exceeding the reach of the 
hand. Use the normal arm-relaxation of playing. If the experi- 
menter is careful to avoid additional muscular contraction of the 
arm as the body moves, the dial on the balance will show an increase 
in weigjht as the body moves backward, away from the hand, and 
a decrease as it moves forward toward the balance. The reverse 
procedure : that of moving the balance toward and away from the 
shoulder, with stationary shoulder-joint, will show the same result. 

The conditions change, however, when force is exerted by 
muscular contraction. In A of Fig. 43 a force at / works with 
a lever arm the length of which is /-a. Assuming this as a radius, 
any point, as /, will move throng a great distance but will have 
proportionately less force, the work done being measured by the 
time and the distance thxou^ which the mass is moved. In G, 
the lever arm is considerably shorter. There is a loss in distance of 
displacement at / but a proportionate gain in force. Besides, in 
A, fixation of c, to prevent its rise when the key-resistance at f is 



KELAXATION 131 

met, is diffictilt because this force acts at right angles to the line 
e-5, a relationship which is least adapted to application of force. 
In G the upward acting force at e acts directly along the bone in 
the line c-5, thus producing a condition of maximal efficiency : 
the skeletal straight-line position mentioned under coordination. 
In such muscular contractions, the weight of the upper arm is 
not actively used, hence its position is of no value. For that reason, 
position G becomes decidedly superior to A or even B. But position 
G is the typical “ leaning forward position accepted as the standard 
by most teachers. This acceptance, in itself, it seems to me, is a 
proof that normally, not arm-weight is used in piano-playing, but 
arm-stroke. Testing out the various arm-positions disclosed the 
fact thao the tendency to produce reactive movement showed itself 
always at the joints the bones of which were in a straight angle, 
and deviated most from the line of action of the force. The earliest 
onset of movement takes place when the angle is a ri^t angle. 
Fixation of the joint can change this, of course, but this does not 
exclude skeletal position as one deterroinant of the amoimt of 
muscular contraction. When two bones are in a straight line and 
the force acts along that line, less muscular contraction at that joint 
is required to withstand the force than if the bones were at an 
angle. (See angles of pull, Fig. 103.) The resulting principle is ; 

The amount of fixation or muscular contraction necessary to 
do work at the finger-tip depends upon the positions of the parts of 
the arm. It is greatest when the resistance acts at right angles to 
the longitudinal axis of the bone ; it is least when the resistance 
acts parallel to this axis. 

Stiffness and Joint-Position. 

Maximum force-effects demand, then, straight-line skeletal 
positions. We note it in jabbing with the finger, thrustiug with the 
arm, and slanting of the entire body in the “ tug-of-war The 
effect upon the organism of this relationship is an association between 
stiEEness and a straight-joint. In children, with a tendency to 
stiffen in playing, it is advisable to avoid the straight-line position, 
so far as possible. The wrist, of all the joints, is most often used 
in this position, with the back of the hand forming a linear extension 
of the fore-arm. Such a position readily results in undue fixation, 
and conversely, the avoidance of such a position, by bending the 
wrist, preferably dorsally, frequently reduces the fixation. 

Inertia. 

There is yet another gain in position G, namely, the minimal 
effect of inertia. With the centre of gravity removed as far from 



132 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 


5 as c in A, any change of direction in the movement by muscular 
contraction at s will require a maximum contraction because 
the muscles are working at a decidedly disadvantageous angle of 
pull. They have most of the arm-weight to overcome. In G, 
the weight of the upper arm is entirely eliminated, the muscles 
having to meet the inertia of only the fore-arm and hand, the lever- 
arm here being c-e, which equals c-s, measured horizontally. Inertia, 
in aU complex piano passages, is of extraordinary importance, and 
its reduction to a minimum is most desirable. Such a reduction is 
secured by bringing the shoulder forward, more nearly over the keys. 
Again, the purpose of this position is not to add the weight of the 
upper relax^ arm, but actually to remove this weight. All movements 
requiring rapid repetition with reversal of direction demand for 
their efficient execution a minimal inertia. Eapid staccato octaves, 
played with the hand, are physiologically and mechanically superior 
to similar octaves played with the fore-arm, because the inertia 
of the moving mass is less when the hand alone moves, than when 
the fore-aim is added. The greater the inertia, the greater must 
be the muscular contraction to overcome it at any point where 
a change, particularly a reversal of direction, is required. And 
the greater the muscular contraction, the less the relative relaxation. 
This applies to a finger-stroke, hand-stroke, fore-arm stroke, or 
full-arm stroke. 

In fact the attribute of inertia sets definite limits to the degree 
to which and the frequency with which relaxed arm-weight can be 
used in playing. So long as there is no change of direction demanded, 
inertia is not a hindrance. But with each change in the direction 
of movement the mass is a factor of great importance. And siuce 
relatively few complex movements in piano-playing are straight- 
line movements, the necessity for reducing to a miniTmiTYi the mass 
of the playing-unit, and through it, the inertia, is seen. The 
fundamental principle resulting from these mechanical relationships 
may be stated thus : 

For speed and dexterity the mass of the playing-unit* or units 
must be reduced to a minimuTn, a thing which requires a degree 
of fixation that makes impossible the relaxed arm necessary for 
arm-wei^t. 

Nor is thmre any saving of muscular effort m resting the arm- 
weight on the keys. When the arm is poised over the keys the 
shoulder muscles carry its wei^t. When the finger-tip supports 
the arm, the shoulder muscles still carry a part of its weight, and 
the remaining part demands additional contraction of the wrist 
and finger-flexors to maintain the horizontal fore-arm position. 



RELAXATION 


133 


Thus the total amount of work done is the same, merely the 
distribution is different. The physiological value of resting upon the 
key is in this distribution. In each ascending arm movement the 
shoulder muscles do the work ; by resting the finger on the key at 
the bottom of descent, some of this work is shifted to the hand 
and fore-arm muscles, thus resting the shoulder muscles for 
a moment. 



CHAPTEE XI 
Weight-Teansfer 

The problem of arm-weiglit in piano technique and that of the 
transfer of this weight from one finger to another is so frequently 
met with in piano pedagogy, that a more detailed analysis of this 
question is desirable. The Eollbewegung ” (rolling motion) 
is based upon the assumption that the arm-weight is literally 
rolled from one finger to another. And the use of the weight touch 
in legato melodies, although it is not accompanied, necessarily, 
by a fore-arm rotation, likewise demands that whatever weight is 
being used for tone production be transferred from finger to finger 
as the melody is played. The mechanical principles already stated, 
and the conclusions reached in preceding chapters, indicate that 
this wei^t-transfer is not a simple, uniform mechanical operation, 
but one varying with other factors of technique. 

Weight-transfer is the act of transferring a given weight from 
one point of support, let us say, finger-tip, to another. If the 
transfer be made without loss, or readjustment to make up for a 
momentary loss, we may say the transfer is perfect ; if, on the other 
hand, there is considerable loss in weight as the transfer is made, 
and then a correction to adjust this undesirable loss, the transfer 
is poor. 

For recording variations in weight-transfer, several types of 
dynamographs were used. In the records here given, vertical 
fluctuations record wei^t-fluctuations, a rise in the line indicating 
an increase in weight, a drop in the line a decrease in weight. A 
horizontal line then indicates perfect maintenance of a uniform 
weight, and the degree to which the curves deviate from such a 
horizontal line indicates the extent of the fluctuations in weight- 
transfer or maintenance. 

The mechanics of weight-transfer may be briefly stated as follows ; 
The application of weight to the piano-key means a certain degree 
of muscular contraction. As this weight is transferred to another 
finger, the^ muscles controlling that finger are appropriately 
contracted in order to support the weight ; and the muscular contrac- 
tion for the first finger is correspondingly lessened as wei^t is 
released. If the relaxation for the first finger is greater than the 

134 



WEIGHT TEAITSFER 135 

contraction for the second finger, wei^t is lost ; it is removed from 
the first key before the next finger is ready to take it up on the second 
key. But if the release is slower than the following contraction, 
there wiU be no loss of weight. Bather, there will be an overlapping 
of weight, which, on an instrument made to record wei^t fluctua- 
tions, win show in an actual increase in wei^t. On the keyboard 
it will result in unnecessary pressure upon one of the two keys. 
The unfortunate part of keyboard construction, one that makes 
the use of the normal keyboard impossible for the study of dynamic 
variations, is that, once the key is depressed, any additional pressure 
will not show itself, but will be spent against the unyielding 
resistance of the keybed. Variations occurring within this range 
are thus lost to observation, other than introspection, and the latter 
is relatively seldom dependable. 

MecTvcmical Determinants, 

Again, if the weight to be transferred is very small, it will require 
less extensive muscular adjustment than when it is large, siuce 
the small muscles of the fingers will sujBGlce to make the transfer. 
Moreover, very little percussiveness need be used for this dynamic 
degree, which requires little force to produce the desired quantity 
of tone. The greater the amount of weight to be transferred, the 
greater is the muscular adjustment necessary for the transfer. 
The efficiency with which the transfer is made thus depends upon 
intensity : the actual quantity of weight to be shifted. 

Percussiveness itself, we may expect, will interfere with the 
efficiency of weight-transfer. Experiment has shown that the judg- 
ment of weight is seriously hampered when any percussiveness 
is present, and, since weight-transfer is but another form of judg- 
ment between weights, this interference will certainly operate 
here too. 

But percussiveness is not the only factor, as we shall see later. 
Since it takes time to transfer weight, that is to say, to withdraw 
it from one point of support and add it to the next, we may logically 
expect to the efficiency of weight-transfer decreasing as the 
speed of successive finger-strokes increases. In rapid finger-strokes 
the time interval between any two successive strokes is too short 
to permit the transfer to take place smoothly, hence fluctuations 
are bound to occur. Fig. 44 shows the transfer of weight when 
percussiveness remains constant and only the speed varies. The 
record began with slow finger sequence (trill 2, 3, fingers). The 
speed was increased toward the middle and then again reduced 
toward the end, the percussiveness in the meantime remaining 
constant. The clearly marked variations in the efficiency of 



136 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

wci^t-traiisfer are thus the result of speed, not of percussion, since 
speed here was the only variable. 

Accordingly, weight-transfer may be expected to depend upon 
three factors : speed, intensity, and percussiveness. It is best in 
a non-percussive touch of low or moderate intensity, made at a 
slow tempo. For it takes time to make any muscular transfer ; 
the amount of such transfer is greater in loud tones than in soft 
ones ; and non-percussiveness eliminates the “ shock ” element 



Fia. 44. 


characteristic of aU percussive touches. How much the transfer 
of weight depends upon these elements will be seen when we study 
various records of weight-transfer. 

Such records may be secured by playing upon an appropriate 
lever, the amount of depression of wMch is controlled by a spring, 
and the deflection of which is transferred to a kymograph for 
recording. The amount of wei^t used will then be shown by the 
vertical displacements of the writing lever. 


Effect of Ifiiensity. 

In order to measure the effect of intensity on the transfer of weight 
a series of trills were played at various dynamic degrees. The 
speed of finger-action was maximal in all cases, the subjects being 
instructed to trill just as fast as possible at aU times. All those 
tested were experienced pianists. Fig. 45 shows a typical record 
in which four degrees of intensity were used. For the softest degree 
at a the finger speed was both greatest and the fluctuations in 
weight-transfer from finger to finger least. This is shown, respec- 
tively, by the number of deflections for any given horizontal 
distance, and by the height of the peaks in this line. Als the intensity 
increases (from a to d in the figures), the number of strokes in a given 
time decreases and the fluctuations in the transfer of weight increase, 
so that when we get to the forte degrees (d), there is a noticeable 
reduction in finger-speed and noticeable fluctuations in the transfer 
of weight from finger to fibager. Not only is there considerable loss 
of wei^t between each two strokes^ but the amount lost varies 



WEIGHT TRANSFER 137 

noticeably, resulting in a curve marked by botk high peaks and 
irregular peaks. 

In all cases, however, there is some transfer of weight, for at 
no point in any of the records does the low point reach the level 
of zero weight. Repeated trials in which the player made an attempt 
to neutralize this speed effect all showed similar curves. We may 
formulate the following law : At a given speed only a certain amount 
of weight can be transferred from one finger to another. In a 
^piano or pianissimo trill it is possible, if the speed be not too great, 
to transfer the greater part of the weight used in the production 
of the tones, whereas in a loud trill only a very small part of the 
weight is transferred. It is physiologically impossible to transfer 
arm-weight in a loud trill. Such a trill is by its very nature primarily 
non-legato, so far as finger-stroke is concerned. 


A 

VvavJWAMAAAAAAAW 

!Fig. 45. 

The mechanical reason for this condition lies in the property 
of momentum. Momentum is proportional to the product of the 
mass and velocity. By virtue of this property a moving body will 
continue to move in an imchanged direction unless acted upon by 
an external force. If considerable weight were transferred in a 
rapid/orte trill we should have the paradoxical condition of a machine 
working at both a speed and a force advantage. This, of course, is 
a mechanical impossibility. In all leverage systems a gain in speed 
is accompanied by a proportionate loss in power ; a gain in power, 
by a loss in speed. 

Effect of Speed, Finger Sequence. 

For purposes of adequate analysis it is necessary to divide speed 
into two types : speed of finger-sequence, in which the same 
finger movement, and hence muscular group, is not immediately 
repeated ; and speed of muscular repetition. The degree to which 
weight is transferred from finger to finger depends upon the nature 



138 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

of tihie finger sequence. If we take the trill as a typical instance of 
repeated movement, we find, that, in order to transfer the weight, 
the first f nger must continue to act as support until the following 
finger has depressed the key. But, in a rapid trill — slow finger 
alternation does not musically count as a trill — the first finger 
must also, as soon as the second finger has produced tone, repeat 
its own tone. If it be held down until the second finger is played, 
a condition absolutely essential to weight-transfer, it "v^l obviously 
not be in as favourable a position for stroke repetition as when it 
is lifted slightly in advance of tone production with the other finger. 
Time is therefore lost before the stroke can be repeated, and, as 
a result, the speed of the trill is reduced. Fig. 47 shows that in a 
rapid figure involving repetition (hence also a trill) all fingers are 
constantly in motion, a in this figure represents a very slow 
sequence of second, third, and fourth &igers. From a toe represents 
a gradual increase in speed, c itself being a very rapid sequence. 
Fig. 46 also illustrates speed-effects. 

If, on the other hand, the speed of the triU must be retained, 
less wei^t will be transferred from finger to finger, or, what amounts 
to the same thing, the trill will be physiologically non-legato. 
A rapid trill with considerable weight-transfer is a physiological 
impossibility. This is seen in Fig. 45, showing the effect of intensity 
on speed and accuracy. 

The following illustrations, Fig. 46, are a record of trills made at 
various speeds. Although the subjects were instructed to maintain 
a constant wei^t-transfer, they all after a few trials realized the 
impossibility of doing this at any considerable speed. Fig. 46a 
shows the transfer of weight from second to third finger and back 
again, when the fibager-strokes followed one another at the rate of 
one per second. In b the rate of finger-stroke was J", in c it was J", 
in d, i", and in e, i". Vertical displacements, as in preceding 
records, show variations in the amount of weight transfer, and 
perfect transfer of weight would result in a horizontal line, whereas 
deviations from perfect transfer are shown directly by the extent 
to which the curve deviates from a straight horizontal line. 

Inspection of these curves shows that weight-transfer becomes 
more difficult as the speed of finger-action is increased, when this 
movement involves speed of individual finger-repetition. For the 
slow finger-speed the weight-transfer is perfect, the upper line at 
a being an unbroken horizontal. The finger rate being one in each 
two-seconds, gives the player time to transfer gradually ” the 
wei^t from one finger to another. Practically the same condition 
holds . when the rate of individual finger-stroke is one per second. 



WEIGHT TRAJSrSFER 


139 


When the strokes foUow at two per second, a slight variation at 
the moment of tone-production is noticeable, as may be seen by the 
points which break the curve in Fig. 46c. These adjustments 
are more pronounced in d, but the primary horizontality of the line 
is still evident. At e, the deviations destroy the horizontal 
continuity, and with the finger rate at eight per second, the weight- 
transfer is markedly influenced by the finger-repetition. 





!Piq. 46. 

In all cases, however, some weight is transferred, since at no 
point in any of the records does the tracing point reach the zero 
level, shown by the faint lower horizontal line in each record. 
As finger-speed is increased, the amount of weight actually trans- 
ferred at the moment of finger-impact deviates more and more from 
the total amount used. Moreover, since the vertical displacements 
in Fig. 46c, are practically aU below the horizontal level at which 
the movement was started, the change of fingers at the rate stated 
involves a loss in weight, not a gain. This must mean that the 
weight is released by the first finger before the next finger is ready 
to carry it fuUy ; a condition made necessary by the mechamcal 
basis of the movement. Each finger-stroke consumes time, and if 
the rate of finger-sequence be so rapid that the times of finger-action 
overlap, a loss of weight in transfer is inevitable. The actual 



140 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

existence of the overlap in finger-stroke is clearly shown also in 
Fig. 47, which records the movements of three fillers for varying 
rates of speed. For the most rapid notes all the fingers are in 
simultaneous motion. The fingers used were 2, 3, 4 ; and the 
tone sequence C-D-E-D-C. In A, Fig. 47, the strokes followed 
one another at the rate of approximately four-fifths of a second ; 
in B, at one-third of a second ; in C, at one-sixth of a second. The 
curves are direct tracings of the finger movement itself. In A 
the motion of each finger is, in point of time, an isolated movement, 
the two other fingers remaining at rest while the third moved. 



c 

Fia. 47. 



This is shown by the horizontal lines between the vertical displace- 
ments. In B, in the descending passage : E-D-C, the third finger 
is lifting as preparation for its down-stroke while the fourth finger 
is still descending. The plateaux noticeable in A are here shortened. 
That is to say, the fingers are not carried in a fixed lifted position. 
In C, no sign of fixed position remains. The three fingers are here 
in constant motion, shown by the absence of any horizontal lines. 
The mechanics and the coordination have thus changed completely. 
In A it is possible to keep the fourth finger depressed until after 
the third has played, thus transferring weight. But this is impossible 
in C, because the fourth is already lifted when the third plays. 
(See the point marked E, top line.) The muscular coordination, 



WEIGHT TEANSFER 


141 


in turn, must differ with the speed. The question of the extent to 
which slow practice is necessary for ultimate speed, when with every 
change in speed we change the muscular reaction, is an important 
one for the psychologist, and its answer awaits an adequate e3q)eri- 
mental investigation. 

This variation in weight-transfer need not, however, afiect the 
legato tone-sequence, because, so long as sujBGlcient weight remains 
on the key to keep it even partly depressed (enough depression to 
keep the felt damper from actually touching the string), the tone 
will continue to sound. And in the middle region of the piano two 
to three ounces are sufficient. Fig. 44 gives a more vivid picture 
of fluctuations in weight-transfer resulting from variations in speed. 
It represents an accelerando and ritardan^ on a trill, with intensity 
and percussiveness relatively uniform. At the peak of the 
accelerando (which, by the way, was not steady in this case) the 
zero level of weight-transfer is actually touched in one point and 
almost touched in several others. This level is shown by the arrow. 

Finger Bejf^tition, 

Thus far we have considered speed-effects as shown in repeated 
movements. We have now to consider these effects when the finger 
order does not involve individual finger repetition at a rate sufficiently 
rapid to interfere with weight-control. And if the explanation 
of the loss of weight-transfer for repeated strokes be true, we 
may expect to find much better weight-transfer when rapid ^ger 
repetition is elimmated, since, in thus case, no need for rapidly 
lifting the fingers exists. 



cdefg 

Fkj. 48. 

A simple form of such weight-transfer and finger-sequence may 
be seen by recording a tone-group such as the following : C, D, E, 
F, G, shown in Fig. 48. Regardless of speed, the weight-transfer 
is practically complete. The minute adjustments at the moment of 
finger-percussion are negligible in comparison with the amount of 
weight transferred, (distance between the two lines). In wei^t 
transfer the curve closely parallels the one in Fig. 46, 6, showing 



142 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

the triU at slow speed of repetition, although in Fig. 48 the finger- 
strokes followed at the rate of eight per second, whereas in Fig. 46, 6, 
the rate was but two per second. Thus weight-transfer cannot 
depend upon speed of finger-stroke unless the element of rapid 
repetition is involved. Otherwise Fig. 48, at the rate of finger-action 
shown, would indicate marked fluctuations in the transfer of weight, 
such, for example, as are shown in Fig. 46, e, where the finger-speed 
is equal to that of Fig. 48. This being the case, we may expect to 
find similar wei^t-transfer if the direction of finger order is reversed : 
5, 4, 3, 2, 1, and records made of this sequence bear this out. Here, 
too, the wei^t transfer is practically complete. 

We may go a step further and record instances of actual increase 
in wei^t during the finger sequence, such as, for instance, that of a 
crescendo^ while passing from C to G, and. of a diminuendo. The 
results are given in Fig. 49. 




The weight increase is here approximately from 5 to 40 ounces. 
Needless to say, this was produced with the arm muscles primarily, 
and was not restricted to finger movements. It shows conclusively, 
however, that the efficiency of weight-transfer depends upon the 
particular fi^e involved and finally, upon the speed with which 
a specific single finger-movement is repeated. So soon as we 
introduce finger repetition into the figure the difficulty of weight- 
transfer is evident. The following group C-D-E-F-E-F-E-D, 
played with l-2-3-4r-3-4r-3-2, produced, as a typical record, the 
curve shown in Fig. 60 where the pronounced fluctuations corre- 
s]^nd to the trill between the third and the fourth fingers. This 
did not result from any incoordination of the fourth finger — the 
physiological awkwardness of which is well known — because similar 
fluctuations occurred with other fingers. 



WEIGHT TRANSFER 


143 


The more evenly distributed weight corresponds to the parts 
of the finger-sequence not involving finger repetition. This sub- 
stantiates the conclusions drawn from the other records, namely, 
that eflGlciency of weight-control demands non-repetition of the 
finger-action. In rapid trills, it is impossible to transfer wei^t 
in any appreciable amount. In figures that do not involve finger 

— 

edefefed 

Fra. 50. 

repetition in immediate succession, weight may be transferred with- 
out appreciable loss in speed, provided of course, that we do not 
demand a non-legato or staccato style. So long as a finger may 
remain in contact with its key until the next finger is played, wei^t- 
transfer is possible even at great speeds. When, however, the first 
finger cannot remain in contact with its key until the next finger 
plays, and this is the condition in all trill fi^es, mordents, turns 
and others, weight transfer is impossible for rapid speeds. Rapidity 
of finger repetition, not rapidity of successive strokes, therefore 
becomes the chief determinant of weight-transfer as measured in 
terms of speed. 

Scales, 

Since the speed of finger-lift is one determinant of weight- 
transfer, it follows that it functions in scale playing at the points 
where the thumb passes under the fingers or the hand over the 
thumb. In a rapid scale it is impossible to get the third finger 
out of the way (ascending, right hand) when the thumb plays and 
the second finger follows, unless it is lifted very quickly. This 
necessarily causes a break in weight-transfer, for precisely the 
same reason as that given for finger repetition, and illustrated in 
Fig. 60 for such fingerings as 1-2-3-4-3-4. Records made of rapid 
scale passages jrove this conclusion to be true. Fig. 51 is a 
dynamograph record of the scale figures indicated by the fingerings 
given. A drop in the vertical displacements means a loss in weight- 
transfer. In both ca-^es there is a decided drop down to the zero 
point where the thumb plays after the third or the fourth finger, 



144 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

whereas up to this point there was a steady increase in weight- 
transfer shown by the gradual rise in the curves. The tempo was 
a Presto. 




Effect of Percussiveness. 

The third factor upon which weight-transfer is based is per- 
cussiveness. As we shall see when we study the records of the 
various touch-forms, the shock-element characteristic of all 
percussive touches destroys continuous contact of finger-tip 
and key, and upon this continuity, of contact weight-transfer 
obviously depends. Fig. 52 is a dynamograph record and was made 
by keeping speed and intensity relatively constant and varying 
the degree of percussiveness, a was a non-percussive touch, and 
the unbroken top horizontal line shows complete weight-transfer 
from finger to finger. At 6 fluctuations at the moment of finger- 
impact begin to appear ; they are more marked at c, while at d, 
where a decided percussive stroke was used, they show fluctuations 
both above and below the average level. The speed of finger 
sequence was but one per second, suflGlciently slow to exclude speed 
effects, as a of Fig. 62 proves, where the same speed of finger-stroke 
shows no fluctuations. The horizontal lines at the bottom of 
each record show the level of zero weight. The effect of percussive- 
ness is another illustration of the dependence of weight-transfer 
upon time interval. The momentary shock impulse does not give* 



WEIGHT TKANfSPER 145 

the muscles time to make proper adjustment. If any adjustment 
is made, it is either insufiScient or oversufficient, usually the latter. 
A sudden stimulus finds the organism unprepared to meet it and 
such a condition usually calls forth a maximal reaction in order to 
take care of great intensity, should the latter he present. If we 
add to this the fact that in percussive touches, as experiment has 
shown, finger-tip and key are not in contact after the moment of 
percussion, we can readily understand why accurate weight-transfer 
in a percussive touch is impossible. 

The fact that we can hold a key and in spite of the percussive 
attack of a second key keep we ght maintained does not contradict 
the principle just stated. In such a case we carry much excess 


eu 





d 


Fig. 52. 


weight on the first key. When the second key is struck, the second 
force is added to the excess wei^t already present, but, since 
the movement of the piano-key is limited, will not show the typical 
percussive variation of the dynamograph. The actual transfer 
of weight then takes place after the percussion and consumes just 
as much time, in fact, sli^tly more, than in a non-percussive 
touch. 

The three factors ; speed, intensity, and percussiveness, however, 
do not afi^ect weight-transfer to such an extent that no weight 
whatever is shifted from finger to finger. In none of the records. 



U6 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

with the exception of extreme degrees, do the fluctuations drop 
to the zero level. Some weight, therefore, is always transferred 
from stroke to stroke. 

In the teaching of legato through the transfer of weight, the 
most favourable condition, accordingly, is one of very slow tempo, 
soft dynamic degree, and non-percussive touch. As we deviate 
from any part of this condition we inevitably increase the difficulty 
of the problem. The necessity for lightness has heretofore been 
overlooked because we normally think of quantity rather than 
smoothness in weight-transfer. If out of a pound of weight, one 
half pound is actually transferred, we have the feeling of consider- 
able weight-transfer, in spite of the one-hundred per cent fluctuation 
involved. When, on the other hand, we transfer completely a 
few ounces, the feeling of transfer is less vivid, although the ratio 
of transferred we^^t to total weight is complete. 

Should the pedagogic problem be the transfer of large quantities 
of wei^t, then the records show that a slow tempo and a non- 
percussive touch are advisable. And, if finally, rapidity of tempo 
becomes necessary, then a light touch and a non-percussiye stroke 
are the easiest means of securing the effect. 

Inertia, 

Problems of weight-transfer cannot be dissociated from the 
physical attribute of inertia, which, under Mechanical Principles, 
is defined as that property of matter by virtue of which a body at 
rest tends to remain at rest, and a body in motion tends to remain 
in motion in the same direction and at the same velocity until acted 
upon by some other force. It takes force, therefore, to set a body 
into motion, and the heavier the body, the greater must be the force. 
In the second place it takes force to change the direction of a moving 
body, and again, the heavier the body, the greater the force required. 
Moreover, it takes time to do either, and the heavier the body the 
more time required by a given force to set it into motion or to change 
its motion. Assuming now that the weight of the arm is resting on 
the keys, any change from this position will require a greater force 
or will consume more time than if the arm is poised by contraction 
of the appropriate shoulder muscles. When the arm is in motion, 
any change of direction will require more force or time, since the 
inertia of the arm is greater. The interference of weiglit-transfer 
with speed is thus evident, and is the result not of a physiological 
difficulty but of a mechanical difficulty. The property of inertia 
likewise helps to determine the most economical form of touch to 
be xused in the various pianistic movements. 



WEIGHT TRANSFER 


147 


Arm-'Weight; 

Among tLe important problems of weigit-transfer comes also 
the transfer of weight into the piano-key by the relaxed arm : 
“ the arm hangs in the keys,” as it has been aptly described. The 
supposition is that, in this position, the loosely hanging arm causes 
its weight to be transferred to the key. In the chapter on Relaxation 
I have pointed out the impossibility of using fully relaxed joints 
in any arm-position practicable for piano-playing. But the fallacy 
of “ weight-transfer ”, as we have seen, goes further. Not only 
can there be no fully relaxed joint in any usable arm-position, but 
also only a part of the arm-weight, and usually only a small part, 
can be transferred to the finger m any condition. The shoulder 
continues to support the remainder, regardless of relaxation. 
Moreover, in the most favourable arm-movements of relaxation 
(see Fig. 43, D, 6) the least weight can be transferred. 

The variation of aim-weight with changes in the position of 
support may be observed by simply weighing the arm on some 
appropriate spring balance, preferably one without a fixed surface. 
A narrow sling attached to an ordinary spring balance will answer 
the purpose. If the sling hangs at approximately shoulder level, 
the weight recorded will become less as we move the slmg from near 
the shoulder toward the hand and finger. The average for a series 
of measurements made of my own arm is, in pounds : midway 
between shoulder and elbow, 8*5 ; in crotch of elbow, 6-3 ; midway 
between elbow and wrist, 4*4 ; at wrist 3*6 ; in hook of second joint 
of the third finger 2*2. That is to say, the further the point of 
support is from the shoulder, with shoulder and point of support 
on a horizontal line, the less is the weight at the point of support. 
In the case cited the total arm-weight is approximately nine to 
ten pounds. "When such an arm hangs freely, with the third finger 
hooked over a piano-key, less than one-fourth of the total arm- 
weight acts upon the key. Of course, the amoimt acting is still 
enough to produce a tone of moderate loudness, which may be 
augmented by increasing the range of arm-descent. But the key 
is by no means carrying the arm-weight, three-fourths of this is 
carried by the shoulder. 

Since a position in which finger-tip and shoulder are horizontal 
does not occur in piano-plajdng, a measurement of the weight-dis- 
tribution in the playing position is advisable. With the upper arm 
at an approximate vertical, and the fore-arm and hand horizontal, 
the elbow, in a specific case, carried a weight of 8 pounds, the mid 
fore-arm 4 pounds, the wrist 3|, and the middle finger-joint 2 
pounds. The proportions are approximately the same as before. 



148 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 


In Older to throw more weight into the finger-tip some intervening 
joints must be fixed. And if the entire arm-wei^t were to be 
transferred, fixation of the whole arm between finger-tip and 
shoulder would be necessary. (See principle two, Kelaxation.) But, 
even then, the whole weight could not be transferred on account 
of the position relationship between the two points, as a result of 
which the shoulder necessarily carries a part of the arm-we^t. 
For with the humerus in an approximately vertical position at the 
side of the body, the head of the bone rests in the shoulder socket 
and gravity presses its under surface against the lower socket 
surfece, thus tending to let the bone hang in the socket as a support. 
Moreover, the fixation of aU intervening joints is diametrically 
opposed to the whole doctrine of weight-transfer, which demands a 
relaxed arm as a necessary physiological condition of this transfer. 
Exactly the opposite is meehanically true : wei^t-transfer demands 
fixation of the joints, not relaxation. Some additional details of 
1h.e mechanical principles here involved have been given in the 
discussion on Belaxation. 



CHAPTER XII 
Veetical Alrm-Movement 

Arm-lift. 

A PERFECTLY relaxed arm hangs vertically at the side of the 
body when the latter is in a standing or sitting position. In order 
to make the arm useful for playing, it must be lifted to some point 
over the keyboard. This arm-lift takes place approximately 
as foEows : The abductors and rotators of the upper arm, situated 
chiefly between the neck and the shoulder, contract to coxmteract 
the efiect of gravity. In the case of abduction the upper arm 
lifts sidewise from the body, raising the elbow to a plane on a 
level with, or above the keyboard. In the case of forward rotation 
the upper arm rotates in the shoulder-socket, bringing the elbow 
forward and upward. The two movements are normally combined 
and involve the activity of practically the entire muscular system 
of the shoulder. 

At the same time the elbow is flexed, and, if the hand originally 
was in the normal hand-position described on p. 32, some pronation 
in the radio-ulnar joiat takes place. The combination of these 
movements will bring the hand over the keyboard, the exact 
point being determined by the degrees to which the various points 
of movement are involved. Thus with considerable abduction of 
the upper arm, slight forward rotation, and but little flexion of 
elbow, the right hand can readily reach the high treble, and the 
left hand, siimlarly, the low bass region. With less abduction and 
greater elbow-flexion the hand is brought over the middle part 
of the keyboard. 

The hand itself will, under these conditions, hang, limply from 
the wrist. Any attempt at control of hand or fingers will involve 
coordination of the muscular systems of the hand which will 
be added to the activity of the fore-arm, arm, and shoulder muscles. 
In any case, the lifting of the arm from any position below the key- 
board to any position over it, and the holding of the hand in any 
playing position involves the muscular system of the entire arm. 
This is, perhaps, more convincingly shown by the fact that move- 
ment at any joint has occurred as soon as the angle between the 
bones forming the joint has been changed. In order to bring the 
arm over the keyboard the angle between body and upper arm, 

149 



150 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGIOAl MOVEMENT 

that between upper arm and fore-arm, that between the plane of 
the hand and the direction of the upper arm, and for all practical 
tone-producing purposes, that between hand and fore-arm as weU 
as those between fingers and hand, have all been changed. Con- 
sequently, movement has taken place in each joint and what 
apparently is a very simple movement is in reality a highly complex 
one. Since the movement is fundamentally in an ascending direc- 
tion, it works against gravity and is an active movement. To speak 
of muscular isolation, therefore, in such a movement as a single 
finger-stroke, is to misrepresent the physiological condition ; 
because, for any stroke whatever, the arm must first be lifted 
partly over the keyboard bringiug into play muscles throughout 
arm and shoulder. Muscularly, isolation cannot exist. The wide- 
spread use of the term is the result of deducmg a muscular condition 
from external appearance ; of assuming that a joint at rest does not 
involve muscular activity. This is largely fallacious ; in all forms 
of piano technique, as the preceding analysis of arm-lift shows,, 
it is entirely wrong. It is true only when the arm hangs freely 
at the side, or otherwise rests upon some external object, and neither 
of these positions plays a part in piano technique. 

Free ArmrDrop. 

If the arm be permitted to drop from the lifted position just 
described, shoulder muscles are relaxed and gravity causes the arm 
to fall. Such a drop is an uncontrolled movement. Because the 
hand hangs vertically from the wrist, the tip of the third (longest) 
finger will be the first to touch the keys. The resistance of the 
key will then begin to retard the hand. Meanwhile the wrist 
continues its descent until finally the fingers rest flat on the keys. 
When the bending back of the wrist which follows this position, 
has reached its limit, the weight of the arm wiQ pull the hand from 
the keys, the perfectly flat fingers sliding over the edge of the keys 
and the edge of the wooden casing beneath the keyboard. When 
the original vertical position of the arm is reached at the side of 
the body, momentum will carry the arm slightly beyond the per- 
pendicular whereupon it will make a few small pendular swings 
before coming to rest. In this type of arm-drop, with fully relaxed 
arm, the keyboard merely arrests for a moment the descent of the 
hand. The movement is useless in practical piano-playing since 
it is uncontrolled. But it permits a conclusion to be drawn that is 
of importance in piano pedagogy, namely, that any arm-drop 
stopping with the hand on the keyboard is therefore a coordinated 
movement, with a certain amount of inhibition, not completely 



VERnOAL ARM-MOVEMENT . 161„ 

free or relaxed. Even the position in which the palm of the hand 
rests against the wood casing beneath the keyboard is not main- 
tained with entire arm relaxation. There is some finger flexion, 
causing the fingers to “ hook ” on the keys, and there is contraction 
of the forward arm-rotators serving to “ jam ” the fore-arm between 
the elbow and the casing of the piano by pulling the elbow forward. 
Otherwise the weight of the arm would pull the hand down from 
the keys. 

The completely relaxed arm-drop, . therefore, plays no part in 
piano technique, unless it be to intensify the feeling of relaxation 
in pupils work^ for this muscular condition. Its relation to the 
typical pianistic arm-drop is given in Fig. 53. 

Modified pr Controlled Arm-Descent. 

What we have to deal with, then, in all descending movements 
of the arm as they are actually used m tone production on the 
piano, is a modified arm-drop, in which partial contraction of the 
muscle groups that lift the arm oppose gravity and hence slow down 
the descent of the arm. It is a condition of partial relaxation, not 
of complete relaxation, and is best known in piano parlance as 
the porlamento tone-production. 

The descent begins more gradually than that of the free arm-drop, 
and, throughout the descent the speed of the arm never quite reaches 
that of the free arm.. As the hand approaches the keyboard, the 
fingers that are not to play are drawn back by contractiog the 
extensor muscles, aided by the abductors, perhaps, while the flexors 
of the fingers that are to play, are likewise contracted so that these 
fingers will remain somewhat curved after they meet the resistance 
of the piano keys. If no attempt is made to avoid percussion, 
or at least to minimize it, there will be a distinct jerk in the descent 
of the arm when the fingers reach the keys, the abruptness of the 
jerk varying with the degree of jflxation. If, on the other hand, 
the percussiveness be minimized, by allowing the wrist to descend 
below the keyboard, the descent of the arm is gradually stopped 
and there are no angles to the movement. These diSerences are 
shown in Fig. 77, the curves a representing a well-controlled arm- 
drop, in which the wrist is depressed after the fingers strike the 
keys, and the curves h showing the efEect of a rigid wrist. The 
grace and ease of relaxed movement is strikingly shown in the 
continuity of the two curves a. (See also Fig. 78.) Since in these 
recorc^ the .speed of the recording kymograph was constant such 
curves show a very fine adjustment between time and movement, 
AH effect of percussiveness has been eliminated and the arm* 



152 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

descent is unbroken by any jerk. At the points where the lines 
begin to curve to the right, negative acceleration begins. That is 
to say, the speed of arm-descent is retarded. From this point 
on, the abductors of the arm contract, aided by the flexors of the 
elbow and the forward rotators of the shoulder as well as by the 
resistance which the keyboard offers to the fingers. Without 
this muscular action the weight of the arm would pull the wrist 
down until the hand reached its physiological limit of bending 
backwards (dorsi-flexion). The^ forward rotators of the shoulder 
contract somewhat in order to control elbow-movement away from 
the keyboard, as the fore-arm passes through its horizontal position. 
Without this action, the arch of the hand could not well 
be maintained. Slight contraction of the abductors of the arm keeps 
it from touching the side of the body. Thus inhibition of free 
movement occurs in all parts of the arm ; at each joint muscles 
come into action to retard its free descent. This retardation must 
not be confused with stiffness, it is necessary for guiding the fingers 
and hand properly to their destination. 

Whether the stiff or relaxed descent is preferable in practice 
must be determined by the particular effect desired. Physically, 
so far as fine tone control is concerned, the non-percussive character 
of the relaxed descent is undeniably better. And physiologically 
absence of shock is likewise desirable. On the other hand, the 
tonal intensity desired may make rigidity necessary, and with 
rigidity must come the shock of impact. In slow melodies of little 
or moderate intensity the relaxed form of tone-production with 
the arm-weight is preferable to a finger-stroke of similar intensity, 
because the finger-stroke, in order to transmit its force to the key, 
must have a fixed hand knuckle as fulcrum. This, in turn, demands 
a relatively fixed arm, and a similar spread of muscles is involved 
as when the arm-drop is used. Moreover, the percussiveness of 
the finger against the key has an undesicable effect upon the tone- 
quality, which is absent in the non-percussive arm-descent. 

Forced Down-Stroke. 

A third muscular type of arm-descent is that in which the muscles 
controlliog the descent of the arm contract forcibly and, reenforced 
by the action of gravity, serve to lower the arm more rapidly than 
when gravity acts alone, as in the free arm-drop. Such down- 
strokes are used in piano-playing in the production of fortissimo 
diords, particularly when combined with a relative rapidity of 
tempo. The descent begins more abruptly and the speed is greater 
than in either case thus far considered. Pig. 63 shows a typical 



VERTICAL ARM-MOVEMENT 


153 


curve c for the forced arm-stroke and, for the sake of comparison, 
a curve for free arm-drop h and one for controlled arm-drop a. 
The abrupt turn from horizontal to an approzimate vertical path 
in c illustrates the rapidity of the beginning of the arm-descent, 
and the steepness of the curve shows the speed of the descent itself. 
In this figure the lines were traced by the wrist, with pantograph 
attachment. Moreover, since there is but very little additional 
bend toward the vertical, once the arm has attained its speed, 
let us say, at approximately one-third of the descent, it follows 
that, in the forced arm-stroke, the greater part of th.e stroke takes 



Tio. 53. 

place at a constant speed. This means that additional force is not 
added «lnring the movement, but the total force acts at practicidly 
the beginnmg of the movement. We may even go a step further 
and infAT from this that the muscular force really ceases to act 
during the stroke since, if it were maintained at a constant throu^- 
out the arm-descent, the accelerating effect of gravity would deflect 
the lower part of the curve more toward the perpendicular. (The 
records for lateral arm-transfer throw interesting h^t on this 
phase.) In the forced stroke the arm is thrown or hurled (1h,e 
Wwf- and ScMeuderbewegtmg of the German pedagogues) by an 
initiftij forceful and maximal muscular contraction, which is then 



154 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

immediately followed by at least a partial relaxation during wbich 
tlie momentum given to tlie arm at the beginning of the stroke serves 
to carry it as a relatively free body through the remainder of its 
stroke. That produces uncontrolled movement except at the 
beginning of the descent, and means that, if the movement end 
as intended, a very fine degree of coordination is necessary at the 
beginning in order to send the arm on its correct path. (The final 
guiding to the goal is the work of other muscles. See Lateral Arm- 
Movement.) The difference between such a movement and' the 
modified arm-drop is snnilar in principle to the difference between 
pushing a billiard ball slowly into a pocket, keeping the head of the 
cue in contact with the ball until the pocket is reached and rolling 
it into the pocket by giving it an appropriate cue-shot. In the first 
case, the cQrection may be changed at any point, in the second 
case, once the ball leaves the cue its course can no longer be modified 
by the cue. We have here the direct counterpart, on a larger scale, 
of the difference between non-percussive and percussive touch. 
In non-percussive touch the finger remains in contact with the key 
throughout its three-eighths inch of descent and, within th s 
distance, any desired adjustment can be made during the course 
of the movement. In percussive touch, on the other hand, the finger 
strikes the key a blow, the duration of which is very brief indeed, 
being little more than instantaneous, so that the key is beyond the 
control of the finger after this impact. The effectiveness of the stroke 
thus depends entirely upon the appropriateness of the force with 
which Ihe finger reaches the key.^ 

In the discussions of the effect of speed on muscular contraction, 
the reality of the initial maximal contraction is shown (Fig. 33). 
Fig. 53, recording as it does the actual path of the movement, 
offers further evidence of this type of contraction, the physiological 
and mechanical economy of which I have already pointed out. 
In the next chapter, on Lateral Arm-Movement, we shall learn how 
such thrown movements are modified as they near their end. This 
means that although the initiators of the movement no longer 
affect it after beginning, the modifiers may step in and direct the 
movement to the desired goal. In their action they do not have to 
work as active-antagonists to the initiators, for these have already 
ceased to act when the movement nears its end. 

Arm-Drop 

EffM of Tonal Intensity on Arm-Drop, 

When the finger meets with the key-resistance this exerts an 
upward force which tends to retard the :^er . In a tone-production 
1 Physical Basis of Piano Touch and Tone, op. cifc. 



VEETICAL AEM-MOVEMENT 156 

with, relaxed arm the finger touches the key while the wrist is still 
well above the level of the keyboard (a modified form of the 
‘‘ dangling ” hand). By the time the finger-tip has depressed the 
key the wrist, in the touch-form we are now considering, is 
usually at a level with, or below the level of the keyboard. 
Accordingly, it must move much faster than the finger-tip. The 
latter traverses three-eighths of an inch, while the former traverses 
a distance varying, between five and nine inches. But slow finger- 
speed means slow key-speed, and this in turn, produces a tone of 
small intensity.^ So that, in order to increase the intensity of the 
tone, we must increase the speed of key-descent. This can most 
readily be done by decreasing the ratio between arm-speed and 
finger-speed ; in other words, by transferring more of the arm-speed 



¥iQt, 64 . 

into the finger. For this transmission of force a lever of sujBficient 
rigidity must be found ; and this is obtained by stifiening all joints 
between the original point of application of the force and the point 
of resistance. Li the case in question these joints are the elbow, 
wrist, the hand-knuckles, and lie finger-joints. The degree of 
stiffness is determined directly by the desired intensity of tone. 
For very loud tones the wrist is practically fixed, and is used with- 
out movement in the wrist-joint, so that the finger depresses the 
key at a speed equal to that of arm-descent. With even slight 
relaxation, there is some loss in speed between arm and finger, - 
and hence, also some loss in tonal strength. 

Fig. 63 ^ows the difference between the movementsof a ‘‘relaxed” 

1 Physical Basis of Piano Tonch and Tone, op. cit. 



166 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

(a) and a rigid arm (c). Apart from a slightly greater speed for 
the rigid arm, the chief difference is seen in the ending of the curve, 
the gracefully retarded ending of the relaxed arm standing in marked 
contrast with the abrupt broken ending of the rigid arm. 
Accordmgly, this abrupt ending, when the recording lever is attached 
to the wrist, becomes an index of the degree of rigidity present 
at this joint. Some records of wrist descent for various degrees 
of tonal intensity are shown in Fig. 64, as follows : 6 =pi 

c=mp; d =mf; e =/; f Time intervals represented at 
the bottom of the figure are in intervals of two-tenths of a second. 
In the pianissimo tone production the wrist is completely relaxed, 
hence shows no break in the line of its descent. The same condition 
applies to the piano tone-production. In mezzo-piano the break 
in the curve indicates an abrupt wrist reaction at the moment of 
finger-key impact. As the tonal intensity is increased this shock 
becomes more and more marked, and in e, and/, even in d, shows 
a curve similar to that shown in Fig. 77 for a rigid wrist. 

Similar results were obtained when the contraction of the 
appropriate muscles was recorded. In forced arm-stroke, for 
example, the volar flexors of the wrist must contract in order to 
prevent the hand from bending back at the wrist when the keys 
are depressed. This contraction, however, is of no mechanical 
value during the part of the arm-stroke preceding key-depression. 
Accordingly, in a well-coordinated movement we should expect 
to find these muscles contracting at the moment of key-impact 
and not before. Fig, 40, in the chapter on Coordination, shows 
a record of such an arm-stroke. A chord was played fortissimo, 
preceded by a high arm-lift. The top line shows the beguming 
of the stroke, the middle line the key-depression and the bottom 
line the contraction of the flexor carpi radialis, the muscle we are 
here considering. The movement was tj^ical of those used by 
trained pianists for loud chordal effects. In this figure the muscle 
is seen to contract at the moment that key-resistance is introduced, 
not before. Moreover, it is seen to relax a moment after key-depres- 
sion, since but little pressure — ^the weight of the hand is quite 
sufficient — is needed to keep the piano key depressed. The muscle 
thus does what is mechanically necessary to attain the aiun of the 
movement and not a bit more. Fig. 65, on the other hand, shows 
the same arm-movement made in an awkward, incoordinated 
manner, quite characteristic of untrained pupils and those of low 
coordinative ability. 

Here the muscle that fixed the wrist is contracted a moment 
before the actual arm-descent begins. There is a very slight 



VERTICAL ARM-MOVEMENT 167 

additional contraction at the moment of key-impact, and a main- 
tenance of this full contraction until the key is finally released. 
The contraction between the points a and &, and that between 
c and d, when compared with 40 shows the amount of wasted 
work. The only mechanical advantage is the contraction between 
& and c. In an incoordrnated movement, therefore, the contraction 
of a muscle is timed incorrectly with regard to the movement as 
a whole, extending over a much longer period than necessary. 
Incoordination may involve not only the use of unnecessary 
muscles, but also the use at the wrong time of the necessary muscles. 
In both cases energy is wasted, and it is tibis waste that stamps 
the movement as incoordinated. 

In all loud chordal work, therefore, the arm is fixed as, or 
immediately before the tone is produced. This ri^dity is essential 
from a mechanical standpoint in order to attain the desired tonal 
intensity. The force on the descending arm acts downward. 










vy\AAAAAAAAAAAAA/WW\AAAAAA/VAAAA^WW'''>'^/^>^/WWW'vV 


a be ^ 

i^o. 65. 

Any “ give ” in any part of the arm between this and the keyboard, 
will cause the force to bend the arm at such a point as soon as 
resistance is encountered. Force is consumed in bending ; hence is 
lost for tone-production. Because of this loss, we stiffen the wrist 
and the arch of the hand when maximal intensity is desired. This 
is another illustration of the incorrect assumption that aU tone- 
production demands relaxation. We can speak of complete 
controlled relaxation only m the softest dynamic degrees, perhaps 
up to and including a mezzo-'piano. Beyond this point, as the records 
show, rigidity increases, until for the extreme degrees of loudness, 
the arm is thrown against the keys practically as a rigid body. 

Two types of records were made to prove this. In the first 
type nothing was said to the player about arm-condition and the 
instructions were merely to produce a tone of a given degree of 
intensity. The resulting arm-movement was then recorded and 
the degree of rigidity shown by the abrupt halt in the curves. 

In the second type the player was told of the effect of stiffness 




158 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

upon intensity and was tLen asked to attempt to produce fortissvm 
tones witL. a relaxed wrist and arm. Althougli quite loud effects 
were thus obtained, they were uniformly below the intensity levels 
obtained with rigidity and as soon as the player felt that he had 
produced a true fortissimo the recording lever showed stiffness of 
the wrist, although the immediate sutsequent relaxation frequently 
deceived the player. 

Coordination and Incoordination in Arm-Stroke. 

In the time and force relationships between the arm-stroke and 
the muscular contraction necessary to offset key-resistance and 
hanomer-impact, we have the true physiological basis of coordinated 
movement. In Fig. 40 the muscle fi^dng the wrist against over- 
extension (the flexor carpi-radialis) is shown contracting just before 
key-resistance is met, and relaxing immediately after key-depression. 
The movement was t37pical of the easy and natural movements 
of the trained pianist and represents, therefore, a well-coordinated 
movement. Contraction of the wrist flexors occurs just in time to 
overcome the key-resistance ; contraction before this time would 
be wasted energy since no resistance is present. The contraction 
ceases just after tone-production because sustained contraction 
would at that time again be useless on account of the absence of 
resistance. The definition of coordiuation given in Chapter IX 
does not permit a waste of energy. 

If, now, we record the movements of a pupil lacking in co- 
ordination we get a result of which Fig. 55 is typical. There is 
little or no difference in the amount of rigidity present at the moment 
of tone-production — the difference is in the duration of contraction. 
The brevity of this, in coordination, has led to the conclusion that 
the tone is itself produced by a relaxed hand and arm, which, 
however, is not true. The teaching of the proper timing of the 
rigidity instead of its complete avoidance is the problem of pedagogy. 

Effect of Tempo on Arm-Drop. 

Since the two mechanical variables determining the final key- 
board force of the descending arm — ^assuming the mass to be a 
constant — ^are its velocity and the distance through which it moves, 
they will affect the speed and range of successive arm-movements. 
Tempo, thus, similar to intensity, will cause variations in the type 
of arm-movement used. 

If the arm-drops succeed one another at a very slow tempo, 
the touch-form described in the preceding pages for the isolated 
ami-Iift and controlled arm-drop will remain. As the tempo 
increases, and reaches a point where the time consumed in mftlring 



VBETICAL AEM-MOVEMENT 169 

a complete arm-descent and ascent overlaps with, tlie following 
descent, a change in the physiology of the movement must occur. 
The same mass must attain the same final force in less time. If 
the distance through which the arm moves is kept the same, the 
velocity of the arm will have to be increased. This, in turn, means 
an increase in the force, which is measured by the product of the 
mass and the acceleration. In order to keep the original force, 
therefore, the velocity would have to be reduced just before tone- 
production, by contraction of the appropriate inhibiting muscles — 
the antagonists to arm-descent. Mechanically this is so much 
wasted work. The greater velocity is needed in order to let the 
strokes follow at a suflBciently rapid tempo, and then this velocity 
must be reduced so as to keep the resulting tonal intensity the 
same. This would not only have to take place near the keyboard 
end of the stroke but likewise at the top of the stroke, where the 
direction of the arm changes from ascent to descent, for the velocity 
of ascent is likewise greater than before and hence requires a greater 
force to overcome it. This forced inhibition is not in keeping with 
a well-coordinated movement, which, as we have learned, is one 
with a minimum of wasted work. Accordingly, we do not 3^d this 
touch form actually used.' 

In order to play a sequence of tones in rapid succession we do 
not increase the velocity and keep the range of slow movement. 
Instead we reduce the range and attain the increased velocity 
by a more forceful contraction of the appropriate muscles. This 
additional contraction gives the arm the desired velocity in less 
distance than before, and the shorter range of movement enables 
us to play the tones in more rapid succession. 

This influence of tempo upon the range of pianistic movements 
may be seen by comparing any two figures recording the same move- 
ment with a difference in speed. As examples see Big. 66, c and d, 
and Fig. 96. 

It is quite characteristic of pupils possessing pcor muscular 
coordination to execute a rapid movement at an enormous range 
and with an enormous expenditure of energy. This is shown in 
Fig. 96 for the simple tapping movement. I recall in this connection 
that a pupil with a very low coordination index, in her attempt to 
get speed into the tapping, lifted herself from the chair — ^she weighed 
about 130 pounds — ^and the entire body became rigid while she 
thumped with a force that drove the recording lever mercilessly 
against its limit of range. Of course, the speed was very sub- 
normal, so that the enormous expenditure of energy with its 
resultant early onset of fatigue was entirely useless, so far as the 
aim of the movement was concerned. 



CHAPTER Xm 


Lateral Ajbm-Movement 

Lateral arm-movements, as a result of whict tlie liand is moved 
along the keyboard, constitute the second fundamental class of 
arm-movements used in piano-playing. They are as important 
as, in some ways more important than the vertical arm-movements 
analysed iu the preceding chapter. The purely horizontal phase 
of such movement has been described, and the sources of generation 
listed, in the discussion of horizontal movement. The lateral 
arm-movement with which we are here concerned is not a simple 
horizontal movement but combines with its horizontal displacement 
a varying amount of arm-lift and arm-drop. In reality, therefore, 
the movement is a combination of arm-drop, arm-lift, and lateral 
arm-shift, and the ratio of vertical to horizontal distance varies 
over a wide range. The analysis, therefore, will be concerned with 
both aspects ; ^e vertical and the horizontal. 

In order to transfer the hand from one part of the key-board 
to another in the least time and with the least effort, at the same 
time avoiding the striking of intermediate keys, the hand must be 
lifted from the first key, transferred to a point above the other key, 
and then lowered. According to such a division the movement would 
be made as shown in Pig. 56 A. This is the plan followed by the 
doctrine of “ preparation ” which demands that the moving part be 
placed over the next key to be played as quickly as possible, and held 
there stationary until the time to play. I perhaps exa^rate this 
somewhat in Kg. 56 A, because in many instances of preparation, 
the initial lift is not insisted upon, but merely the immediate 
transfer of the moving part over its next key. Such a movement 
may be more accurately represented as m Fig. 56 B. In these 
and in subsequent figures in this chapter the curves are shown as 
they would appear to the player if riie eye were on a level with the 
keyboard. The reader, therefore, is supposed to be facing the 
keyboard, as a player would see it, with the keyboard^ raised to 
the level of the eye. This does away witibi the fore-shortening of 
the vertical displacements if the eye were above the keyboard level. 
Such a movement divides itself into three parts : a muscular 
coniiaction starting the hand along ac ; a compensatory contraction 

160 



LATERAL ARM-MOVEMENT 


161 


to bring it to a stop at c ; a third contraction for the movement 
cd. The force ac is working at maximal eJEciency, since it transfers 
the hand over the key in as short a distance as possible. The 
inhibition and poising at c is wasted work since it does not affect 




tone-production. The hand in passing from a to c already has 
a velocity sufficient to produce the desi^ tone, hut actu^ m an 
I'TiAffifiiATit direction. A change of direction is needed for adequate 

tone-product on. . i-/. a -d j 

The movements of preparation, shown in Eig- 56, A, B, aeman 



162 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

tLat this velocity be reduced to zero, and tbeu be generated again. 
Tbe necessary cban^e of direction bas been secured in a mechanically 
wasteful manner. Moreover, such a movement, mechanically 
considered — ^and to a certain extent also physiologically considered 
— ^is in truth two movements : a lateral arm-transfer and a vertical 
arm-descent. The mechanical properties of one part do not affect 
the second part because a period of rest intervenes, even though 
the arm be poised over the keys. The movement of Fig. 66 B, 
therefore, is mechanically wasteful and physiologically inco- 
ordinated since it does not attain its aim with a minimum 
expenditure of energy. 

The awkwardness in this movement is the manner in which the 
change of direction is secured, which violates all principles of 
smooth mechanical motion. The alternative is to secure the change 
of direction without a loss of velocity. This may be done by sub- 
stituting a curvilinear for the rectilmear motion, and, given in 
its simplest form, results in a curve such as that in Fig. 66 C. 
Here the change of direction is in infinitesimal increments, and 
shows the action of a constant force. This we infer from the 
parabolic nature of the curve. The velocity may remain unaltered, 
and all incoordination resulting from the shock of an abrupt 
stop or change, is eliminated. But this gain has been accompanied 
by a loss in the efficiency of the direction in which the final force 
acts. It is measurable by the angles made by the two sets of arrows. 
The key-movement being vertical, maximum efficiency of the force 
demand that it, too, act in a descending vertical. A gain in direction 
may be secured, without loss in velocity, by raising the height of 
the curve, shown by the dotted line of Fig. 66 C. But this gain is 
again accompanied by a loss, this time in the needlessly wide arc, 
the hand traversing a considerably greater range than that needed ^ 
for the desired tone-production. And since co5rdinated movement 
does not allow excess energy, the highest curve of Fig. 66 is still 
not the most effective way of securing the desired result. 

We get this efficiency by keeping the curve relatively low and 
shifting the direction change to one side as in Fig. 66 D. Here 
the hand reaches the key in a vertical direction, there are no angles 
to interfere with velocity, and there is no excess arm or hand 
lift. The t37pe of motion shown, therefore, fulfills all the require- 
ments of coordinated movement. 

The reverse movement may be readily inferred. Here the 
geometric and mechanical phases are reversed. Accordingly, 
the movement will be made about as in Fig. 66 E. 

The hand,, therefore, would not traverse the same path for its 



163 


LATERAL ARM-MOVEMENT 

return movement as it would for the first part of the movement. 
And this condition would hold for aU similar movements. The leap 
of an octave, back and forth, for example, is not a single arc of 
a circle, or two coinciding arcs, with only the direction of movement 
reversed, but a different arc. Eor the curves are not symmetrical 
with respect to an axis midway between the end-points. This 
asymmetry, contrary to popular belief, is an integral part of all 
piano technique, as we shall find later. Finger-lift and finger-drop, 
arm-ascent and arm-descent, ascending and descending scales 
and arpeggios are not mere opposites, but physiologically difiEerent 
movements. The muscular action is not simply reversed, it changes 
in kind. 

If we combine the two curves, D and E, shown in Fig. 56, we 
get F. The only incoordinated phase revealed by this curve is 
in the sharp points at the key-surface. These points, however, 
are partly determined by the shock of the key against the key-bed. 
The resistance introduced is abrupt, and external ; consequently 
quite different from that shown at c m Fig. 56 B, where the change 



is entirely muscular. No muscular coordination can entirely 
overcome this shock at the points of key-contact, without sacrificing 
tone-production. However, this undesirable feature of the move- 
ment can be reduced somewhat by rounding off the point slightly. 

The curve then takes the form shown in Fig. 57. 

, From theoretical, mechanical, and physiological standpoints, 
therefore, this is the typical curve we should expect to find when 
we record lateral arm-movements in opposite directions. 

Records of lateral arm-movements under normal playing 
conditions may be made in several ways. By appropriately 
arranging a pantograph, attaching the tracing point to the wrist 
in such a way as to avoid all play and yet not restrict the movement, 
and letting the recording point trace its motion on a smoked or plain 
paper surface, the lateral arm-movement, on a reduced scale, 
wiU be accurately recorded. Fig. 58. This device demands some 
adjustment of detail before it wiU operate satisfactorily. The 
substitution of a universal joint for the usual pivot will allow for 
a slight motion in planes other than the recording plane and will 
thus remove the constraint placed upon the player if the instrument 



164 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

operates in only one plane. To allow for the deviations thus 
permitted, it is necessary to have the recording surface reenforced 
by sensitive springs, which will keep the surface pressed against 
the recording point as it deviates from the vertical plane. Finally, 
the attachment of the lever to the arm must be firm, yet not inter- 
fering with movement. I have found the use of a wide heavy 
rubber band, comfortably tight around the arm, and suflSciently 
strong to overcome the resistance of the instrument, quite useful 
and satisfactory. A number of small, thin elastic bands, attached 
in various directions and loops will hold the lever-end firmly 
against the arm-band. In fact, such an arrangement makes a 
very satisfactory substitute for a universal joint. It is service- 
able for measuring all displacements in a vertical plane, parallel 
to the line of the keyboard. 

A simple form of such motion is that made by the hand in skipping 
from one octave to another and back again. In order to avoid 
finger action, octaves instead of single keys were played, and the 
interval used was also an octave. The speed was moderate, intensity 
also. A typical form of curve obtained is that of Fig. 59a. 

When -this is compared with the curve of Fig. 57 it will be found 
to agree in all phases, as they have been analysed in the preceding 
paragraphs. We find the double-loop, the rounded corners and 
flatted arcs. The hand is not lifted unnecessarily high, the curves 
are not symmetrical with respect to a midway vertical axis, and 
angles have been eliminated. 

In order to eliminate all doubt as to whether this curve could 
be affected by the method of recording used, I employed a much 
better and more refined method for most of the records used in 
this and subsequent chapters. The apparatus consisted of a tiny 
electric bulb and socket, about one-eighth inch thick and three- 
quarters inch long, to which very fine flexible wires were attached. 
Current was furnished by dry cells, and an appropriate rheostat 
made control of the intensity of the light possible. The electric 
bulb was then firmly attached to the part of the fibnger, hand, or 
arm, the movements of which were to be recorded. These move- 
ments were then photographed, the intensity of the light being 
ample to affect very clearly the photographic plate. Needless 
to say, the room itself was in very subdued light. The weight of 
the light and socket was about one-eighth of an ounce ; its attach- 
ment to any part of the arm thus required but little force to insure 
firmness . Moreover, the pianists whose movements were recorded 
admitted that its attachment in no way interfered with the natural- 
ness or freedom of the movement. 



Plate IX 




Fig. 59. d. Pantograph record of repeated octave leaps; h, photographic 
record of a similar movement. 



Fig. 61. Pantograph record of alternating ascending fourths and descending 
seconds: G — C — B — — G — 


(To face p, i6 







165 


LATEEAL AEM-MOVEMEITT 

Tlie curve for a lateral shift of a twelfth, at moderately fast 
speed and moderate intensity, with the light fastened behind the 
hand-knnckle of the third finger, is shown in Fig. 596 and agrees 
very closely with that obtained by the first recording method. 
Fig. 59a. Since there could be no “ play ” in the photographic 
recording, the form of curves shown in Kg. 59 are true pictures 
of the path traversed by the hand in such a movement. 

The form of the curve moreover, helps us to analyse the operation 
of the underlying mechanical forces. In the chapter on Coordina- 
tion and Incoordination I pointed out the fact that in lateral 
arm-shifts of sufi&cient speed and amplitude the arm is “ thrown ” 
by a maximal initial contraction, and thereafter traverses a part 
of its path as a relatively free body. TJie path traversed by a free 
body thrown into the air is a parabola, a curve symmetrical to 
an axis passing through its vertex and focus. When the arm is 
thrown sidewise by another person, or when it is similarly thrown 
by appropriate maximal muscular contraction at the beginning 


6 



of the stroke (this latter method demands careful practice on the 
part of the experimenter), it will describe a curve typified by those 
shown in Fig. 56 C. These are parabolical, symmetrical to the axis 
represented by the dotted Une. That is to say, if the movement 
of the arm be unarrested, gravity will act to guide the hand in a 
parabolic curve. The difference between this curve and that actually 
made in playing the interval in question may then be seen by 
superimposing a parabola on one of the curves of Fig. 59, so that 
the initial (left side) parts of the curves coincide. The result is 
seen in Fig. 60. 

The part of the curve between a and 6 may be considered the 
part in which the hand travels as a free body. If this freedom 
continued the hand would move in the direction of the dotted line 
6d. The fact that the lateral motion is already stopped at c shows 
that contraction of the humerus rotators and the arm adductors 
is guiding the hand to its goal at c. There has accordingly been more 
initial contraction than that actually necessary to reacli c, but the 
gain has been in greater velocity and in the more advantageous 



166 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

direction in which the hand finally strikes c. In the chapter on 
coordination, records showing these muscular contractions are 
given (Figs. 34, 40) ; here we see the same contractions reflected 
in the geometric aspect of the curve itself. 

From the preceding analysis and records we can determine in 
advance the type of curve which will result when combinations of 
lateral shifts occur, in which the range of each step varies. A 
progression from G up to C, back to B, up to E, back to D, up to G, 
is an example. An ascending fourth is followed by a descending 
second. Since the amplitude of the curve does not increase with 
the range (see page 162), the return from the high points will more 
nearly coincide with the ascent itself. Fig. 61 illustrates the move- 
ment of the hand in an octave progression on the keys mentioned. 
The characteristic loop on the right hand side is absent, because 
the hand returns at a higher angle from C to B than that present 
when it passes from B to E. H the distances had been reversed 
into an ascending second and a descending fourth, the loop would 
be reversed. 

The mechanical advantage of these curve-forms is a gain in 
direction of force with minimal distance traversed. The curves, 
in general contour, are not unlike the preparation curve of Fig. 66 B, 
the difierence being in the rounding off of the point c. It is possible 
that the value of teaching preparation in the acquisition of new 
movements is in this similarity, in spite of the obvious waste of 
such a movement as that typified in the preparation curve. The 
question is primarily a psychological one, the answer to which 
I prefer to withhold until I have secured sufficient data on practice 
effects. At any rate a preliminary investigation, in which the 
pupils were taught to move the arm from the beginning in the form 
of Fig. 57 instead of Fig. 56 B, has produced very gratifying results, 
and seems to indicate that a knowledge of the curve-forms used 
in actual playing is of more than theoretical interest and value. 


The movements thus far considered have been analysed without 
considering intensity and speed. In actual piano-playing, how- 
ever, the same distance niust be traversed with various tonal 
intensities as aim, and at various speeds. 

Variations in intensity may affect the curve of motion in several 
ways, by increasing the angularity when descent begins (as in B, 
Fig. 56, and Fig. 60), or by increasing the amplitude (height) 
of the curve as a whole (as in Fig. 66 C). An increase in angularity 
would reintroduce the sudden shift of forces, the extreme being 



Fig, 62. Pantogtaph records of repeated lateral arm-movements, showing the 
effect of tonal intensity upon amplitude of curves. 


[To face p, 166 



Fig. 65. Pantograph records of repeated lateral movements (interval : a twelfth) 
showing effect of intensity upon amplitude of curves. 



Fig. 64. Ascending diatonic octaves, showing effect of intensity upon height of curve. 


{To face p. 16 






LATEEAL ARM-MOVEMENT 167 

that of Fig. 66 B. This, in turn, demands the rigidity which is a 
necessary part of all loud tonal effects. It would involve greater 
inhibition and a proportionately greater renewal of speed after 
the turn. The increase in amplitude of the curve as a whole, on 
the other hand, introduces none of these difficulties (see Fig. 62). 
The direction of key attack remains much the same, the cur'vffinear 
nature of the curve reflects maximum mechanical efficiency and 
the greater distance traversed means greater velocity. Since the 
mass of the moving part is the same as before, this results in 
greater force at the key-end of the movement, hence produces a 
louder tone. 

Fig. 63 also shows the effect of intensity or dynamic variations 
upon the lateral arm-movement. The interval represents an octave 
leap, pp, and the same leap ff. The angularity of the curve does 
not increase as we increase the intensity. Instead, the amplitude 
of the curve increases, this increase being shown by the greater 
height of the curve for loud tones when compared with that for 
soft tones. The curvilinear nature of the movement and the 
resulting mechanical advantages are thus retained, with the 
necessary gain in velocity needed to produce the louder tone. 

Steady variations in dynamics are illustrated by the crescendo 
and the decrescendo or diminuendo, A typical pantograph record 
of a crescendo made for a diatonic octave progression through one 
octave is given in Fig. 64. Two features of tjhie movement should 
be noted; the nature of each curve remains unaltered in any 
fundamental aspect, and the crescendo is dkectly reflected in the 
increase in amplitude of the curve. From the nature of each arc 
the speed may be inferred as moderately great. (This is explained 
in detail under Agogic Effects.) Thus intensity does not affect 
the nature of the curve but only its amplitude. The point recorded 
in Figs. 62, 63, 64 was the centre of the hand. 

A check was, of course, made with the photographic method, 
which produced identical results. It is interesting to note, in this 
connection, that in two instances the players were absolutely sure 
that the crescendo was made without lifting the hand a bit hi^er, 
the increase in tonal-intensity being produced by using greater 
force with the same amplitude. Yet the photographs of both move- 
ments showed the usual increase in amplitude. I cite this to prove 
again the danger of relying upon the opinion of even first-rate 
pianists in an analysis of movement. Introspection usually alters 
the physiological response and the normal speed of the move- 
ments we are considering is too great to be analysed by the unaided 
eye, The graphic method alone is here dependable. 



168 ASPECTS OP PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 
Agogic Effects, 

The effects of variations in tie speed of tie movement are more 
prononnced. In a very slow movement, let ns say one requiring 
two seconds for eaci arm-siift, tie need for a “ leap ” as generally 
understood, does not exist. Th.e movement may be made in two 
ways : by a steady, extremely slow, arm-movement, using tie 
curve-form illustrated in tie preceding figures ; or by a somewiat 
more rapid movement, wiici brings tie hand over tie desired 
key, followed by a vertical descent. This is tie metiod of prepara- 
tion, it is true, but not exactly in tie sense described on page 160. 
A steady arced movement would demand a force acting througi 
a considerable time in order to overcome tie effects of gravity. 
More work would be done in that case, than would be done in a 
more rapid movement. If tie hand be moved close to tie key- 
board until it is approximately over tie key to be played, and be 
then lifted, we save tie lift during tie transfer of tie hand. Tie 



I I I I I \ \ \ I I 

Fig. 66. 

rate at wiich tie key-depressions follow one another is sufiSciently 
slow to permit tie separate lift at tie end of tie stroke without 
mechanical waste or interference. Tie two types of curve are 
represented in Pig. 65. 

Prom a mechanical standpoint 6 is tie more advantageous move- 
ment, because it permits a greater part of tie weight of tie arm to 
be carried by tie shoulder socket ; and from a physiological stand- 
point it is also tie better coordinated movement. 

Por these reasons we find it in tie actual records and photo- 
graphs made of lateral arm-movement under normal playing 
conditions. Fig. 66, in wiici tie interval was a twelfth ; a, duration 
of eaci stroke two seconds ; b, one and one-ialf seconds ; c, one 
second; approximately one-third second. At a tie hand transfer 
was purely horizontal in three of tie strokes. (Tie high curves 
are e:q)lained later.) Upon reaching its lateral goal, tie hand was 
then Iffted in order to prepare tie ensuing descent. This accounts 



Plate XII 





Fig. 66, Photographs of repeated lateral arm-movements, showing efiEect of 
tempo upon the form of curves : very slow ; d, very fest. (See Fig. 67.) 


(To face p. i68 





Plate XIII 







LATEEAL ARM-MOVEMENT 


169 


for the short towers at both ends. At the ri^t hand side one curve 
at least, being slightly non-coincident with the others shows very 
clearly the separate rise at the end of the stroke. At 6 the speed 
was slightly faster but the horizontal transfer and the end-lift are 
marked. The same applies to c, although here, in the shift from high 
to low tones the horizontal aspect has been lost in the 
immediate rise of the curve. A small remnant of the end-lift 
remains near the upper left hand comer. Finally, when the speed 
is considerably increased beyond this point (d) we get the typical 
lateral curve with which we are already familiar. 

The high curves in a demand explanation. This is a typical 
instance of wasted motion. The arm was excessively lifted, 
transferred, dropped to key-level, and then lifted a second time 
in order to prepare for the upper descent. The entire first lift was, 
therefore, wasted work. The motion was used because a previous 
conversation caused the pianist who made this record to concentrate 
on the arm-movement itself. Later records, made unobserved, 
that is to say, under normal playing conditions, showed complete 
absence of these high curves. It should be pointed out, moreover, 
that the high curves aU occurred with an ascending interval. This 
is an illustration of a fact which we shall discuss repeatedly later, 
namely, that opposite movements so far as the keyboard alone 
is concerned are not necessarily or usually opposite muscular move- 
ments. The forms here given, although they are representative 
of individuals, are at the same time typical in their general contours, 
as many other records prove. In Fig. 67 a similar series of records, 
made by the pantograph method, is shown. The transition from 
the double movement to the sin^e, as the speed of the movement 
is increased (from a to d) is more nicely graded in this series than 
in that shown in Fig. 66. The second series is given to serve as 
a check on the first. It proves that the typical nature of speed 
efiEects is independent both of the individual and of the method 
of recording. 

Steady variations in speed are reflected musically in the 
acceZerawdo and the ritard. If the arm-mass remain constant, 
an accelerando will demand an increase in velocity, and, iE the 
tonal intensity be kept constant, an inhibition of this velocity 
immediately before tone-production. By reducing the mass of 
the moving part a gain in velocity may be secured with less expendi- 
ture of energy. In the lateral movements we are here considering, 
the range of the movement, an octave or a twelfth, is too great to 
permit substitution of a smaller unit than the arm, so that the 
effects of the accelerando will be reflected in the nature of the curve, 



170 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

as sIlotoi in Figs. 66, 67. If, on the other hand, we vary both speed 
and intensity, as in a cal/mdo, the agog'c aspect demands varying 
velocity, and the dynamic aspect also. The effects of each, alone, 
have been given : the one keeps the angle of incidence between 
finger and key as effective as possible, the other minimizes the resis- 
tance of gravity. We may. logically expect, therefore, to find 
variations in both the amplitude and the nature of the curve when 
we record a movement combining the crescendo and the ritard. 
Beading Fig. 68, from left to ri^t, which represents a diatonic 
octave passage with crescendo and ritard, we note that the curve 
changes gradually from the single arc to the lateral shift plus 
end-lift characteristic of slow movements. At the same time the 
increase in amplitude reflects the crescendo phase. (The depression 
in the middle was an unintentional shift in the hand-position, 
remarked by the player after the passage was played.) And 
for the same reason, only the amplitude should change if the 
crescendo be made with uniform speed. This gives the typical 
curve shown in Fig. 69 which is additionally valuable because 
the pianist making the record insisted that he made his crescendos 
without any increase in the height of arm-lift. (The partial dis- 
tortion of the curves results from the angle at which the movement 
was photographed.) 

Range Effects. 

We have finally to consider the effects which variations in the 
lateral range have on the other phases of the movement. Such 
variations are, unfortunately, inseparably linked with variations 
in speed. If, for example, I move my arm through a distance of 
one foot, then through two feet, when the time is constant the 
speed is doubled ; when the speed is constant the time is doubled. 
Accordingly, the preceding analyses of dynamic and agogic varia- 
tions furnish the clue to the effects of range. Fig. 70 shows the 
fore-arm movement for the passage played : C-D-C-E-C~F-0-6- 
0-A-C-B-G-C. The point photographed was, as before, the centre 
of the hand, at the third &iger knuckle. The speed, even had it 
not been recorded at the time of the playing, could readily be inferred 
from the nature of the curve, which is that of a moderately rapid 
movement. Siace the notes played were of equal value the velocity 
of the hand increased with an increase in the size of the pitch or 
keyboard interval. 

The amplitude of the curves does not increase as the distance 
increases. The hand is lifted just as high to get from C to the 
adjoining D as it is to get from G to its octave. As the distance 



Plate XIV 



c d e f s a 6 


Fig. 70. Photograph of hand-movement in the octave figure : C — — C — 
E — C — — C — G — C — A — C — — C — C. Intensity uniform. Note flatten- 
ing of curve with increase of interval. 



,/ . 


Fig. 71. Same as Fig. 70 with a crescendo added. Note increase in height 
(amplitude) of curve, (Compare with Figs. 62, 63, 64 and 69.) 


■i' 






■'7 


X 

a. 




Fig. 73. Displacement of curve-apex as a result of tone-accentuation. 
(Compare with Fig. 39, b,) 


[To face p, 170 







LATBEAL AKM-MOVEMENT 


171 


increases the curve grows flatter, and the ratio of vertical to hori- 
zontal displacement grows smaller. We may conclude, therefore, 
that with intensity constant, the lift of the hand is independent of 
the lateral distance. It remains constant for any one degree of 
intensity. The increase in. arm-velocity wMch necessarily 
accompanies an increase in interval would normally produce a 
louder tone. This is counteracted by the angle at which the force 
acts, and by muscular inhibition ; the angle varying from approxi- 
mately 80° for the diatonic step to 45° for the octave. 

When intensity is increased, that is to say, when a crescendo is 
made in playing the passage in question we get the curve of Fig. 71 
which shows an increase in amplitude as the interval is increased. 
As a result the hand reaches each key, regardless of the distance 
involved, in an approximate vertical direction. The greater distance 


A 



til 

jii 


c 





m 



B 






_ — 


f -- 


JL ± 




■ IHH 


— 






m 

— 

E 


. » 

^ -J- 







Fig. 72. 


travelled results in a greater hand velocity, which"^causes the 
crescendo . In this particular record the crescendo applied primarily 
to the upper tones, those forming the scale. The repeated C was 
kept at a more uniform intensity. As a result we have a marked 
raising of the peak of the curves to the right and no similar dis- 
placement for the return strokes to the left. This manner of m a king 
a crescendo in a passage ^like the given one is more widely used than 
is generally believed. The printed page marks the crescendo as 
extending uniformly over high and low tones as at A, Fig. 72, 
but in reality it is often played, for artistic reasons resulting from 
the melodic relationship of the upper scale-line, as at B. The curve 
of Fig. 71 shows some of this dynamic relationship, though in a 
slightly less pronounced form, and accounts for the lower curves 
at the left-hand (middle C) side of the passage. That is to say, 



172 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 


the range of crescendo on the scale line exceeds that on the repeated 
tone-line. Similar passages in piano literature abound : the 
accompaniment figure in Raff’s La Fileuse, the left hand passage 
in Chopin’s Etude, Op. 10, No. 4, shortly before the end and the 
, right hand in the same opus. No. 3, may be mentioned. 

Effect of Intensity upon Accuracy. 

In the chapter on coordination intensity was shown to depend 
upon the spread of muscular contraction : the production of a loud 
tone involved a larger muscular field than the similar production 
of a soft tone. In other words, the mass is greater in one case than 
in the other. But the property of inertia makes a large mass un- 
wieldy wherever rapid changes of direction in the movement are 
necessary. And we actually find such unwieldiness reflected in 
a lack of accuracy when we record for comparison differences in 
intensity. These are demanded, for example, in passages involving 
accentuation of certain tones while the arm is shifting its position 
rapidly, Liszt’s Campanella, or the end of Schumann’s C major 
Fantasia are instances. The difiSculty, in its simplest form, is 
represented by rapidly repeated octave leaps, with all the lower 
or all the upper tones, but not both, accented. The result is given . 
in Fig. 73 in which the lower tone at a was the accented tone. We 
note, of course, the typical increase in amplitude with an increase 
in intensity, which throws the apex of the curves for the descending 
arm to the point indicated by the arrow, while no symmetrical 
point exists for h. But we note also a convergence of the lines of 
motion as we approach or leave h, and a divergence on the side 
of a. Since the position of both keys was equally accurately fixed, 
this divergence cannot be mechanically desirable, and represents 
an inaccuracy in the movement. A study of other figures where 
uniformity of speed makes the comparison possible (Fig. 96) will 
show a similar lack of accurate control. The difficulty thus becomes 
general, and since it is absent when the intensity difference is 
excluded, we may safely consider it a result of intensity. It points, 
once again, to the fundamental physiological association between 
speed (includiug accuracy) and lightness. And, conversely, if 
acmracy he the aim in learning a passage that involves leaps and 
speed, the lightest possible practice will he advisable. Such passages 
are proverbially difficult, hence the admonition not to “force” 
in then performance has a real physiological and mechanical basis. 

Spring-Release. 

In works on piano technique one frequently meets the conception 
that the hand and arm, in leaving a key rapidly, do so with a spring, 



LATERAL ARM-MOVEMENT 173 

a sort of “ kick-off ”, similar to tke kick of a gun. Tke conception 
is erroneous, tkougk tke error can be explained. Very frequently 
tbe abrupt leaving of a key for an extended leap has been preceded 
by an equally abrupt leap to the key. The duration of key-depres- 
sion is so short and abrupt, that a certain amount of force is con- 
sumed in pressure against the key-bed. This readily gives the 
feeling of a “ kick-ofi ” from the key. A second factor leading 
to the belief of a spring-release, is the initial finger thrust or lift 
which we shall study later, under the effect of intensity variations 
upon the finger-stroke. 

The truth of the matter may be learned by recording the muscular 
contraction and the path of hand or arm-movement. If a kick-off 
takes place, there must be a force acting in a direction opposite 
to that in which the hand moves. Therefore, if the hand be placed 
upon a sensitive balance and be abruptly moved in the direction 



taken in a lateral keyboard leap, the kick-off will result in a 
momentary depression of the balance, showing the downward 
acting force. Absence of this depression means that Abstoss (the 
German term is here superior to the English) is not present. Fig. 74 
shows four records of the needle of the balance at various 
intensities, to which I have added the curve that would result if 
a kick-off ” were present. There is no deflection in any line 
recorded. That holds for any degree of intensity, indicated by the 
various intensities shown. As the hand leaves the surface of the 
balance there is an immediate release of pressure, and not a 
sign of an increase, which is indispensable if a kick-off ” had 
been present. 

Furthermore, if the hand were thrown from the key in such a 
manner, with a ‘‘ kick-off ”, the contraction of the muscle would 
be affected ; in fact it would be partly superfluous because some 
of the force would be gained by the assumed elasticity of the key. 



1Y4 ASPECTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL MOVEMENT 

But we find precisely the same contraction of the muscle (Fig. 76) 
whether the hand be started in mid-air or from the key-surface. 
In this figure a shows the contraction of the pectoralis major when 
the arm is transferred laterally through several octaves from key 


a 



Fiq, 75 . 


to key ; the same movement started in mid-air. The contraction 
of the muscle is the same in both instances. 

Finally, in such a start, if a kick-off were used the hand would 
first move a short distance in a direction opposite to that desired, 
for in starting from mid-air there would be no key-bed resistance 
to oppose this downward acting force, hence its effect would be 



shown by movement in the direction of the force. Fig. 76 records 
directly the movements of the arm from a point of rest in mid-air. 
The lines start immediately in the direction of movement and do 
not show any signs of an opposite force. At m are shown two curves 
to illustrate the effect of the opposite force, if it were present. 



PART m 


THE TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 




CHAPTEK XrV 


ArM-IiE6AT0 

This type of movement characterizes the playing of most slow 
cantabile passages requiring at least a moderate degree of tonal 
intensity. The arm is alternately raised and lowered while the 
finger-tip remains in contact with the piano-key. The touch is 
mngbly comparable to the controlled arm-drop already discussed, 
the chief difference being in the actual distance through which the 
finger-tip itself moves. In the arm drop and lift, the hand finally 
leaves lie keyboard. In the arm-legato the lift of the hand must 
cease, when the hand reaches a vertical position, otherwise the legato 
will be destroyed. 

The primary value of such a touch-form, apart from its legato 
property, is in the control possible, and in ihe reduction of the 
percussive noises. It seeks to combine the advantages of the arm- 
drop with those of the non-percussive touch. A so-called “ singing- 
tone ”, the usual aim of the arm legato, is a tone of at leairt rnoderate 
intensity. This demands sufficient key-speed, and this, in turn, 
sufficient muscular force. The distance through which the key 
moves before tone-production is less than three-eighths of an inch. 
The attainment of the desired speed within this distance demands 
a fairly quick and considerable application of force. The weak 
finger muscles are normally not adapted to this work. Therefore, 
the wei^t of the arm, and the contraction of the arm-depressing 
muscles are brou^t into play. The greater distance throu^ which 
the arm moves gives a better control of the djmamics, and the 
non-percussiveness between key and finger-tip eliminates the inter- 
ference of “ shock E3q»eriment has proved first tlat the range 
of movement is, within certain limits, one determinant of the 
control of the movement : the greater the range, other things equal, 
the better the control. Secondly, that any percussiveness produc^ 
“shock” which in turn ioterferes seriously with kinesthetic 
judgments, particularly where, as here, fine discriminations are 
involved.! One must remember, however, that range ceases to 
function as a determinant of control when the speed becomes great. 

1 0. Ortmann: "Weight Discrimination as a Measure of Teohnieai SkiU in 
Piano-Playing," Jl. Comp. Psych., vol. iii. No. 1. 

177 N 



178 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

The amount of arm-weight introduced into the tone-production 
varies from zero to the greater part of the weight of the whole arm. 
It can never reach the entire arm-weight on account of the shoulder 
attachments. (See Chapter XI, on Weight-Transfer.) The con- 
traction of the appropriate arm-muscles may be used to any degree, 
so that we can pass from the finger-stroke to the final full-arm stroke 
throu^ many degrees of intermediacy. The hand, the fore-arm, 
or the whole arm, for example, may be the pla 3 dng unit. Each 
will affect the key-movement in a particular way. Some typical 
differences are found in the curves of Fig. 117. When the finger 
stroke alone is used, unsupported or unaided by arm-wei^t, tilie 
movement of the finger takes place as at a. When combined with 
hand-weight and some muscular contraction in the fore-arm the 
curve at 6 results. The normal cantabile full-arm tone is shown at 
c, and at d, an exaggerated full-arm descent. As we pass from a 
to d we note a gradual elimination of the break in finger-descent. 
This abrupt retardation, shown by the horizontal break at the arrow- 
• point, in the descent of the line, is most marked at a, because, 
with only the finger as the playing-unit, the ratio between key- 
resistance and playing-weight is relatively large, and when the key 
is touched a noticeable retardation in the finger-descent is the 
result. The retardation is less but still readily discerned in the 
curve for hand-weight at h whereas in the curves for full-arm it 
has been practically eliminated. Since any abrupt break in curves 
recorded as were these, represents an element of impact or “ shock ”, 
the desirability of using a more massive tone-producing body than 
the finger, in any slow, sustained tone-production is evident. The 
details of the proper distribution of forces are given in the chapter 
on Finger-Stroke. 

Wrist Movement in Arm^Legaio, . 

At the same time the relatively slow tempo and the moderate 
intensity of tone desired permit the use of a partially relaxed arm. 
A conspicuous feature of this relaxation is the ease and grace of 
the movement of the wrist region. (See especially Fig. 78.) 
Fig. 77a shows the descent of the wrist for well coordinated relaxed 
arm-descents. For the sake of comparison two curves 6 made with 
a ri^d wrist are likewise given in the figure. The relaxed arm 
continues on its descent uninterrupted at any specific point by 
the sudden action of key-resistance. By proper adjustment between 
fi^r-speed and arm-speed, the percussiveness is completely 
eliminated. With the rigid wrist, however, the shock of finger- 
key impact is directly transferred to the wrist ; and this, being 



ARM-LEGATO 179 

fixed, comes to an abrupt stop. The relaxed arm, therefore, 
eliminates the element of shock from this touch-form and conversely 
stated, the e l i mi nation of shock or impact repulsion demands jpari 
passu, a relaxed muscular condition. 

A comparison of the upper parts of both curves of Kg. 77, up 
to the point at which key-resistance is met, shows marked similarity. 
From this we may infer that the stiffness of the wrist does not 
materially affect the muscles in the shoulder, which control the 
movement of the upper arm. The descent of the arm may yet take 
place freely although a part of the muscular sjrstem within the arm 
is in a state of hyper-tension. Such a coordination, for example. 



enables us to strike a forcible blow with accurate aim. The point 
is important technically because it shows that not all joints in a 
movement need be relaxed. So long as the joint in which movement 
actually takes place (the angle made by the bones must change if 
there is movement) is relaxed, and the fixation of other joints 
does not play over into the relaxed joint, this fixation will not inter- 
fere with the accuracy of the movement. 

Failure to allow for this combination is responsible for the popular 
belief that in tone-production with a fully relaxed arm, finger and 
wrist joints are likewise fully relaxed. That is not true, the finger- 
joints are most decidedly not relaxed, and the wrist-joint only 
partially so. We are primarily conscious of relaxation because 



180 TOUCH-FORMS OP PIANO TECHNIQUE 

in any movement our sensations come cldefly from tlie joint at 
wMcli tlie greatest motion takes place, in this case the shoulder. 
But this feeliug of relaxation is not a true index of the physiological 
mechanics underlying the movement. All joints between the point 
at which the greatest part of the motion occurs and the finger-tip, 
must be fixed sufficiently to transmit the desired force, without loss, 
to the piano-key. Por piano degrees the fixation is slight, for 
forte degrees, it is considerable. The mechanical principle involved 
is that of a compound lever. (Por additional illustration of the ease 
and grace of wrist movement in the arm-cantabile see Pig. 78.) 

Weight Distribution, 

Closely connected with the problem of arm-movement in the 
arm-legato touch is the distribution of the arm-weight during the 
successive key-depressions. Most textbooks speak of and lay 
special stress upon a transfer of weight : the shitting of the weight 
from one finger to the next, with no withdrawal between. The 
advocates of the “ Rollbewegung ” go a step further and demand 



Pig. 78. 


the rolling of the arm-weight from one key to the next in a manner 
similar to that of a rolling wheel, in which the spokes carry the 
wei^t m turn. 

Once again this conception is illusory and at variance with the 
mechanical principles underlying the movement. With the arm 
relaxed there can be very little weight transfer during arm-ascent, 
and arm-ascent is a necessary phase of the movement we are now 
considering. As the arm is lifted its free weight is obviously with- 
drawn from the keys. A weight of a few ounces is all that is needed 
to keep the piano-key depressed and this weight is but a small 
part of fun arm-weight. Hence the depressed key may give the 
impression of carrying arm-weight when actually it is carrying 
a minimal amount, the arm-ascent usually having removed more 
than ninety-five per cent thereof. 

The rate at which the withdrawal of weight takes place varies 
primarily with the speed and with the rigidity or relaxation of 
arm-ascent. A rigid arm will require but a very minute motion at 


ARM-LEGATO 181 

the shoulder to lift the finger-tip entirely from the key, and hence 
the withdrawal of weight and the cessation of tone take place 
very rapidly. The arm is, in such a case, a simple lever with the 
fulcrum at the shoulder. 

If, on the other hand, the arm is partially relaxed, gravity will 
cause the hand to remain unlifted until the upper arm has heen 
lifted. Weight-release will consequently be much slower, and will 
at the same time be under better control. The inference from this 
graduality, that the tone is likewise gradually stopped, is erroneous. 
The cessation of tone results from the fall of the damper upon the 
string and the nature of this mechanism in the piano precludes 
any gradual stopping of the vibrations of the string. The mechanical 
advantage of the slow key-release is ia the reduction of the noise- 
elements (the thud of the returning action-parts) and in the better 
muscular control. 

The transfer of the force of full weight during arm-ascent is, 
of course, physiologically possible. We can even increase key- 
pressure during arm-ascent, but certainly not by a relaxed arm. 
And for what purpose ? It does not influence the tone that has 
sounded nor does it help the preparation of the next tone. The 
distribution of forces during arm-lift, in relaxation, make a main- 
tenance of full weight or an increase thereof at the finger-tip 
impossible. The only muscular force necessary for arm-lift is 
the contraction of the elevators of the humerus. And obviously 
as the humerus lifts, its distal skeletal attachments, fore-arm, 
hand, and fingers will be drawn after it. When pressure oir wei^t 
is retained at the finger-tip, in spite of arm-lift, it can result only 
from a decided contraction of the muscles antagonistic to arm-lift. 
But simultaneous contraction of antagonistic groups always results 
in a hyper-tension, a stiffness, and consequently any arm-Uft with 
sustained key-pressure in excess of that of the freely ascending 
arm, is, pianisticaHy, an incoordinated movement. It is not arm- 
weight that is transferred, but a force resulting from muscular 
contraction opposed to arm-lift. The two are physiologically 
different elements and cannot be used synonymously in any adequate 
analysis. 

The aim of arm-lift is either cessation of tone or preparation 
of the following arm-drop. Siuce we are deahng here with arm- 
legato, the first-mentioned aim may be discarded. In the second, 
the ascent of the arm becomes the negative, the descent becomes 
the positive aspect of the movement. Any hyper-tension in a 
negative movement becomes doubly disadvantageous since themove- 
ment itself is not directed toward meeting any external resistance. 



182 


TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

Records made with tte dynamograpK stow clearly wtat a small 
amount of weight is actually transferred from key to key. In fact 
a study of the numerical values showed this weight to be just 
sufiB-cient to prevent premature key-ascent. If we now record 
the arm-lift which takes place at the end of a phrase and place the 
two curves side by side we note that they are markedly similar 
(Fig. 79), the dotted line representing arm-lift in one of a series 
of aim-legato movements, and the solid line representing arm-lift 



at the end of a phrase. A rise in the lines indicates weight-with- 
drawal. This agreement is further proof that in a proper arm- 
legato, wei^t is withdrawn between movements in the same manner 
as at the end of a phrase if the arm be relaxed. 

Therefore, the two important facts to be remembered in 
connection with arm-legato are that the arm-weight is not trans- 
ferred from key to key, over ninety per cent being withdrawn 
during each arm-ascent, and secondly, that the smaller finger and 
hand joints are not fully relaxed during tone-production. 



CHAPTEE XV 
Tremolo 


The essential feature of this movement is a turning of the fore-arm 
in tib.e rcdio-ulmar articulation. If the upper arm Tiangs in any 
but a vertical position, contraction of the shoulder mnanifta jg 
necessary to lift the arm against gravity from the side of the body 
and to hold it in this position while the fore-arm rotates. Con- 
traction of the flexor muscles of the upper arm is needed to bend 
the elbow. Contraction of the dorsal rotators of the sbnuldar is 
required to keep the fore-arm in the horizontal position. With- 
out this contraction the fore -arm would hang vertically from the 
elbow. Kexors and extensors of the wrist are contracted sufficiently 
to give the wrist the rigidity necessary to transmit the fore-arm 
rotation to the finger-tips without loss of motion at the wrist- 
joint. If this joint is relaxed it will ascend when the finger-tip 
reaches the key, because the resistance acts upward and produces 
movement in tibe nearest relaxed joint. This is shown in the staccato 
touches. If, for the present, we consider the octave-tremolo, 
contraction of the abductors of the thumb and fifth finger is needed 
to allow for the octave spread, and contraction of the thumb- 
abductors and fifth-finger flexors to overcome the key-resistance, 
which otherwise would push back the finger in the hand-knuckle. 
Once again then, the movement involves some contraction and 
adjustment throu^out the whole arm and shoulder. 

The movement itself is made by an alternating contraction 
of the pronators and supinators of the fore-arm. This contraction 
is not equal, because the mid-position of the fore-arm is not the 
horizontal position made necessary by the position of the keyboard. 
The unequal strength of the opposing muscle-groups, and the fact 
that the axis of rotation passes through the fourth fiboger and 
not through third finger, are other causes of this inequality. 

When the hand rests upon the keyboard the thumb and fdth 
fin g er support a part of the arm-weight- The abductors of the 
shoulder stiU re main contracted so that the elbow may retain its 
proper elevation, and this, of course, withdraws some of the aim- 
ur eig Tit, from the keys. The forward rotators of the shoulder and 
the biceps may relax because the keyboard relieves them of the 

183 



184 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

need for supporting the arm. The tremolo movement, therefore, 
when applied to the piano, may be made by resting alternately 
on thumb and fifth finger, or by poising the arm over the key- 
board at a slightly higher level and turning in the radio-ulnar 
joint. In no case does tremolo originate in the elbow-joint. This, 
as a simple hinge joint, cannot permit motion around the longi- 
tudinal axis of the fore-arm. 


If the arm-weight (always only a part of the full arm-weight) 
rests alternately upon thumb and fifth finger, how is the transfer 
miade from one to the other ? With the hand held vertically over 



the thumb the centre of mass is in line with the point of support. 
As the ri^t hand, for example, approaches the horizontal position 
the centre of mass shifts toward the right. The thumb-tip, there- 
fore, loses in mechanical advantage and added muscular contraction 
is needed to keep the weight sustained. Or, conversely stated, 
as the hand approaches the horizontal there will be normally 
loss of weight on the thumb side, and an appreciable increase at 
the fifth finger as this depresses its key. The reversal of weight 
occurs when the hand turns from the fifth finger back to the thumb. 

The curve for this weight release may be found by hinging 
an appropriately heavy rod to one end of a balance, ""the 




TEEMOLO 


185 


level of whicli, by means of a recording point traces its movements 
on a kymograpb. The rod may be placed in a vertical position 
and then permitted to fall freely to tbe horizontal position by 
means of the hinge, in which the friction must be reduced to a 
minimum. Here we have the mechanical equivalent of the weight- 
transfer procedure in tremolo. A typical curve obtained is shown 
in Fig. 80. The curve is typical of angular variations in force- 
action and cam be deduced mathematically when we know the 
original force and the angles at which it acts. 

It shows conclusively that as the rod begins to leave the vertical 
the loss of weight is small, but as it nears the horizontal it is much 
more rapid, reaching close to zero at the moment when the next 
jSnger depresses its key. That holds equally well for the so-called 
relaxed arm, the weight of which is supported by the finger. Con- 
sequently, if there is pressure retained uniformly on the first key, 
until the next is reached, it cannot be arm-weight, but must be 
a force resulting from muscular contraction. The mechanical 
and physiological conditions parallel those discussed under arm- 
legato, which also show the impossibility of weight-transfer. 

A better proof of this absence of weight-transfer is found when 
we record the tremolo on a dynamograph. In this case it is quite 
impossible to keep the needle of the instrument at any fixed level, 
regardless of the speed at which the tremolo is played. At relatively 
slow speeds, the pressure drops to zero, at more rapid speeds the 
second impact catches the lever before it has had a chance to descend 
fully. The hand in such a case is turned less than in a slow tempo, 
hence the release of wei^t is naturally less than in a slow tremolo. 
The forces acting in fore-arm rotation as used in the tremolo touch 
are directed away from the key held, toward the key to be played. 
It is, accordingly, mechanically impossible to maintain weight 
unless additional muscular contraction, opposed to the tremolo 
itself, is introduced. And such an introduction would be inco- 
ordinated. The conditions prevailing are precisely “those discussed 
in detail under weight-transfer. There it was shown that weight- 
transfer demanded for its magnitude and efl&ciency extremely 
slow sequence of movement and non-percussive attack, both of 
wh ch, especially the slow tempo, are opposed to the arm tremolo. 
If a finger tremolo be substituted, we have the conditions of a trill, 
which likewise cannot be played with weight-transfer. 

Tremolo Trills. 

Among the important pedagogic problems resulting from the 
tremolo touch is the application of this touch-form to alternating 



186 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

tones regardless of the size of pitch-interval involved : to the usual 
finger trill, for example. Various authors recommend its applica- 
tion without qualification, others strongly advise against it. A 
study of the mechanics of this motion will show to what extent 
its application from a physiological and mechanical standpoint 
is advisable. 

In all fore-arm tremolo touches we are dealing with a rotary 
motion around an axis running approximately parallel to the long 
axis of the fore-arm. This rotation is shown clearly in the turning 
of a doorknob or the turning of a screw-driver. If during such a 
motion the thumb and the fifth finger are fully extended and 
abducted (as in an octave stretch), both thumb-tip and finger-tip 
will describe arcs of a circle. As the distance of the plajmg units 
to the axis of rotation becomes less, these arcs become less in extent, 
thou^ they are subtended by equal central angles. This, is illus- 
trated in Fig. 81. And it, on the other hand, we keep the length 



of arc (the distance through which the finger-tips move) the same, 
by increasing the central angle, we alter the (Erection and degree 
of curvature of the stroke, until in extreme instances, the finger 
would be travelling parallel to the keyboard through a part of 
its stroke, as shown by the smallest ra^us in the figure. All this 
is at a mechanical disadvantage for tone-production, and we may 
formulate the principle that the nearer together the two pla 3 dng 
units are, the less useful is the tremolo motion. Octaves, sixths, 
and fifths lend themselves to tremolo in the order named, because 
the diameter between the two playing points is sufficiently great 
to produce effective arcs. Thirds are less good for fore-arm tremolo, 
but still possible. Seconds, the basis for all trills, can be played 
tremolo only at a decided mechanical disadvantage, which usually 
affects the tonal result also. 

In any case of tremolo the hand must be so shifted (abducted 
at the wrist) that the axis of rotation falls midway between the 
playing parts. With the hand normally in Kne with the fore-arm 



Fig. 82. Photogtaphs of the movements of thumb-tip and fifth-finger 
tip in tremolo octaves, diatonic movement. 



Fig. 83. Similar to Fig. 82, with addition of thumb-movement 
to fore-arm rotation. 




Fig. 86. 


Effect of intensity upon amplitude of tremolo-rotation. 
(Read from right to left.) 


\Tofacep. 1- 










TEEMOLO 187 

(tlie anatomical median position) this axis runs through the fourth 
finger, not, as is generally stated and believed, through the third 
finger. In order to make the third finger the centre for fore-arm 
rotation, the hand must be slightly abducted toward the fifth finger 
side. A tremolo performed with unequal distances from the axis 
would normally produce unequal forces and hence unequal tonal 
results. On the other hand, the physiological inequality of the 
pronating and supinating muscles, as well as the greater ease of 
supinating over a horizontal keyboard, must likewise be considered. 
If pivoting on the thumb be carried through ninety degrees, until 
the hand stands vertically over the thumb, the last part of the 
movement is normally accompanied by elevation of the upper arm, 
a part that is not at all used in pivoting on the fifth finger. Not all 
simple octave tremolos are played solely with fore-arm rotation, 
however. Very often some finger-action is added, particularly 
when it is desired to inflect the dynamics of the passage. A diatonic 
octave-tremolo performed primarily with fore-arm rotation is 
illustrated in Eig. 82. The curves of movement for the thumb and 
for the fifth finger, right hand, are shown as they would appear 
from the position of the player, if the eye were on a level with the 
keyboard. The pointed top is the curve for the thumb, the rounded 
top that for the fifth finger. This difference is the result of a small 
amount of thumb movement during the playing. (This flexion is 
more marked in Fig. 83.) Both the thumb and the fifth finger describe 
fairly concentric arcs around the single axis of rotation. Since 
the axis lies between the moving points, these arcs will curve in 
opposite directions. The nature of the curves is the same for both 
thumb and finger when finger-movement itself is excluded. 

If finger-action be added to the fore-arm rotation in a tremolo, 
a curve such as that of Fig, 83 is produced. There is little difference 
in the part corresponding to the fifth finger, since this would make 
the stroke awkward, but a marked difference for the thumb. 
The stroke is considerably less in amplitude and is complicated 
by a bending-in of the thumb-tip (fiexion) shown by the horizontal 
shift at the top of each thumb-stroke. 

All the records of an octave tremolo with shifting hand, made 
under normal playing conditions, of which that in Fig. 82 is typical, 
showed some admixture of finger-action with the fore-arm rotation. 
That is to say, in playing tremolo octaves with changing pitch, 
the pianist normally does not restrict the movement entirely 
to the fore-arm rotation, but adds a little of finger-stroke. So 
that even in a movement, which, better than any other — with the 
exception of a finger-stroke or hand-staccato — could be restricted 



188 TOUCH-POEMS OP PIANO TECHNIQUE 

to rotation about a single joint, we find movement at several 
joints contributing. 

Various devices are resorted to by tbe player, when, in spite of 
obvious mechanical disadvantages, a trill on adjacent keys is 
played with an arm-tremolo movement. Thus it is not necessary 
that the fingers be adjacent. The hand may be cupped so that the 
tips of the second and fourth or even second and j^h fingers are 
brought close enough together to cover adjacent piano-keys. The 
lever arm is then the distance between the hand-knuckles of these 
fingers, and this being considerably greater than the distance 
between adjacent fingers, the arm-tremolo touch becomes some- 
what easier. It is, however, a makeshift at best. The mechanics 
of the problem place a trill among the finger-strokes, and not among 
the tremolo touches. 

Finger-tremolo. 

This leaves the opposite phase to be considered, that of 
performing an octave tremolo without fore-arm rotation, by 
means of finger-stroke. 

In our study of hand-position, the dMculty of finger-flexion 
with finger abduction was pointed out. It is much more difficult 
to use a descending finger-stroke freely when the fingers are 
‘‘ sprawled as in extended chord work, than when the fingers 
are in the familiar five-finger position The reason for this 
is in the skeletal and muscular structures of the hand, which make 
it impossible to bend the fingers in the hand-knuckles and at the 
same time separate (spread) the fingers widely. With abduction 
we must have extension. Accordingly, to use a finger-stroke 
(flexion) with .the hand extended into the octave position, is, 
normally, to use the stroke at a physiological disadvantage. The 
muscles making the hyper-thenar eminence, however, make such 
a movement possible, chiefly for the fifth finger, and lessen the 
physiological disadvantage. 

The chief physiological advantage of the finger-tremolo over the 
arm-tremolo, however, is not in the muscles of the fifth finger, but 
in the reduction of the factors of inertia and momentum to a 
minimum. We have seen that any rapid movement requiring a 
quick change of direction is most economically made with a light 
body. The fingers are much lighter than the arm ; and since the 
tremolo touch demands a complete reversal of direction, the fingers 
can execute this much more easily than the heavier arm. Although 
arm-tremolo is a rotary motion, this motion stops at each key- 
contact and reverses. And at these points the momentum of the 



TREMOLO 189 

moving mass very noticeably afiects tbe amount of muscular 
contraction required to reverse tie direction. Assuming the speed 
of finger-descent to be tbe same in both cases, it will take consider- 
ably more force to reverse the arm than to reverse the finger. 
(See Mechanical Principles.) This two-fold requirement recurs 
at each key-contact, and the waste in energy for a prolonged 
tremolo can readily be inferred. 

When the intensity demands exceed the muscular strength 
of the fibagers, arm-rotation may advantageously be added or sub- 
stituted. But for all soft and moderately loud degrees, the finger- 
tremolo is much better. It permits better control of tone and less 
expenditure of energy, hence it is a better coordinated movement. 
TMs is again a concrete illustration of the need for finger drill 
in order to strengthen the finger flexors l 3 dng in the hand. As 



Fig. 84. 


a matter of fact, not a few concert pianists, Josef Hofmann among 
others, always use the finger-tremolo under the conditions here 
outlined. The stifEness which often accompanies a pupil’s attempt 
at finger-tremolo results, invariably, from an insufficient strength 
in the finger muscles. The movement is not at all awkward once 
this strength has been secured. Moreover, a figure such as that 
given in Fig. 84a, cannot readily be played except with finger 
tremolo. 84& can be played only with finger-tremolo. 


Turning the hand laterally at the wrist permits a wide range in 
the fingering of tremolo figures. But not all fingering is equally 
effective. Taking an interval of a fiLfth as an example, the ffiigers 
used may be 1, 2 ; 1,3; 1, 4 ; 1, 5 ; 2, 4 ; 2, 5 ; 3, 5. In each case 
the hand will be so turned at the wrist that the axis of 
rotation will be brought to an approximate mid-point between 


190 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

the fiuger-tips used. This equality of division is necessary on 
account of the mechanical principle shown in Fig. 81. When 1 and 
2 are used, the mass of the hand is almost entirely on the outside 
of the second jSnger. With each rotation of the fore-arm this mass 
rotates. The centre of mass of the hand thus lies considerably 
to one side of the axis of rotation. Its arc of rotation is, therefore, 
relatively great and the centrifugal force generated, relatively 
large, lie constant change of direction of tib.is mass, demanded 
by the tremolo touch, thus becomes mechanically awkward. The 
same difl&culty exists, in an opposite direction, when 3 and 6 are 
used. It is present to a less extent when 1 and 3 are used. 
Accordingly, the rule to be followed in a tremolo fingering is to use 
that fingering that permits the centre of mass of the moving part 
to be as nearly in the axis of rotation as possible. 

Here, too, we find the value of a finger tremolo. If, for example, 
a tremolo be demanded from 1 and 2, and the use of other fingers 
be excluded, the tremolo should be made with finger-action not 
fore-arm rotation. When the finger-stroke is used, the hand remains 
relatively quiet, no arm-momentum is created, and the difficulty 
of the alignment of the centre of mass is thus eliminated. 
Ghord-Trmolo, 

A type of tremolo frequently found in piano literature is the chord 
tremolo : a rapid alternation of the tones of a chord, grouped in 
various ways. Some of these forms in the case of a six-five chord 
and a sixth-chord on C are shown in Fig. 85. 



To the factors already mentioned is here added that of inequality 
between the lower and upper group of tones (i, j): In i the force 
necessary to produce equality of tone in top and bottom groups 
is three tines as great for the lower as for the upper group. This 
relationship is reversed iny . Moreover, the three finger-tips must strike 
the keys simultaneously, hence they must be carried in one line. 
The tremolo, therefore, lies between the tones e and g in h; g and 
Of isi i\ c and e in y , and e and • o ixi h. The first group may 
advantageously be played with fore-arm tremolo since the mass 


TREMOLO 191 

of tte moving part is distributed on both sides of the axis of 
rotation, i and however, cannot readily be so played. 

In the first place, in both cases the centre of mass is to one side 
of the axis, and in the second place, the three fingers striking 
simultaneously are moving at different speeds, as a reference to 
Fig. 81 will show, if a fore-arm tremolo motion be used. The rule 
in such cases is to use a finger-stroke without fore-arm rotation. 
Even though the tones can all be played with a fore-arm tremolo, 
the differences in tonal intensity and agogic evenness will spoil 
a finished tremolo effect. The extreme tone will always be accented 
on account of the maximal speed of the fifth finger, which is furthest 
removed from the axis of rotation. So long as a pure fore-arm 
tremolo is used these speeds — hence force-variations — ^follow as 
a mechanical necessity. 

Such chord tremolos, therefore, are always difScult for pupils 
who depend entirely on fore-arm rotation for tremolo effects. 
The degree to which the arm-tremolo should be used in chord 
figures, depends, first upon the equality of the number of tones 
distributed on the two sides of the axis of rotation, and 
secondly upon the distance between the two tones nearest 
the axis, ifc. Fig. 86, is better adapted to a rotary tremolo than A, 
although in both cases the tones are equally distributed with 
regard to the axis of rotation : two on each side. The difference 
lies in the distance between e and amh and e and ginh, i and j 
in Fig. 85 are more difiB.cult than hoxh because in the former group 
the tones are unequally distributed. The more imequaUy the tones 
are grouped and the closer the groups stand, the more should 
finger-action replace fore-arm rotation. It is on this account that 
immature pupils fibad such tremolo figures exceedingly difi&cult, 
as those in the Waldstein Sonata of Beethoven, or iu many of the 
orchestral transcriptions. The passages are not effectively playable 
with the simpler fore-arm rotation, and the fimgered tremolo is not 
yet in the workable vocabulary of the student. 

Sjpeed. 

The effect of speed on tremolo is likewise a transfer from arm- 
weight to arm-stroke. The acceleration equals the force divided 
by the mass. Assuming the force (intensity) to be constant any 
increase in mass will reduce the velocity. If the force be 10 and 
the mass 2, the velocity will be = 5. An increase of the mass 
to 4 will halve the velocity. Accordin^y, we avoid this difficulty by 
substituting fore-arm stroke for fore-arm weight. That is to say, 
we reduce the mass and thus increase the velocity. This phase 
is discussed in detail under weight-transfer. 



192 TOUCH^FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

Rapid tremolos, therefore, are from a muscular standpoint 
non-legato touches ; the weight is not shifted from thumb to finger, 
or finger to finger. Instead, the arm-weight is fuUy carried by the 
shoulder-muscles and the key-depression is produced by the 
descending fingers, the descent of which results from the contraction 
of the supinators and pronators of the fore-arm, or from finger- 
.stroke, and not from the action of gravity. Here, again, is an in- 
stance of a non-relaxed touch-form ; the arm instead of hanging 
in the keys, is poised above them. 

Speed, moreover, diminishes the distance through which the 
playing parts move. The greater .the speed, the less actual move- 
ment in the finger-paths, and the more muscular contraction to 
make up for the loss in distance, since, so long as intensity is the 
same, the finger must reach the point ol escapement with the same 
velocity. 

IfUendiy, 

With speed constant, the effect of increasing intensity upon the 
tremolo movement is to add muscular contraction to arm-weight. 
Force being the product of mass and acceleration, it may be increased 
either by increasing the mass or by increasing the acceleration. 
If, by adding arm-weight we increase the mass, we also increase 
the inertia. A heavy body moving slowly may produce the same 
force as a light body moving rapidly. The inertias of the two 
will be different, however, because the masses are different. The 
direction of the light body may be changed much more readily, 
and since in tremolo this change of direction occurs at each stroke, 
top and bottom, it is mechanically preferable to increase the 
velocity instead of the mass. This is done by forceful contraction 
of the supinating and pronating muscles while the upper arm 
is poised by the shoulder muscles. An active down-stroke 
replaces the action of gravity upon the fore-arm. Only when the 
rate of succession of the strokes is extremely slow is the use of arm- 
weight advisable. 

Dynamics. 

Ji spread^ of muscular action is a necessary mechanical result 
of increase in tonal intensity, we should expect to find this spread 
in the tremolo touch when this is accompanied by a crescendo. 
Fig. 86 shows a diatomc octave tremolo, ascending, from p to jT. 
The observer is looking across the keyboard at the player. Con- 
sequently, frorn right to left on the figure is ascent on the key- 
board. The point of light was attached near the elbow. The minor 



ITEIEMOLO 193 

fluctuations in the curve are probably due to some play in 
the recording apparatus. But the increase in amplitude as the 
tones become louder is clearly evident as we pass from right to left. 


The range through which the fore-arm may be rotated is approxi- 
mately a strai^t-angle, 180^. But, as I have already pointed out, 
this range does not have the horizontal hand-position as its middle. 
When, consequently, we rotate the hand equal distances from the 
keyboard the muscular contraction is not equal on both sides. 
It is more dfficult to pivot on the thumb than on the fifth finger, 
for the range on the fifth finger side is much larger. The turning 
into the position in which the thumb is over the fifth finger is 
a free, easy movement ; that requiring the fifth finger over the 
thumb is decidedly less so, because here we begin the motion at 
the limit of fore-arm pronation and must resort to humerus 
abduction. A fore-aim tremolo, therefore, is not a balanced, 
reciprocating or symmetrical alternation, but an asymmetrical 



Fig. 87. 


movement, in which the movement of the thumb differs somewhat 
from that of the little finger. Such a difference has already been 
shown in Fig. 83 in curves made by the thumb-tip and fifth finger- 
tip in a rapid diatonic tremolo. The curve beginning on the left 
is that for the thumb ; that beginning an octave higher (middle 
of the record) is that for the fiLfth finger. The observer faces the 
keyboard, the curves are as they would appear to the player if 
his eye were on a level with the keyboard. The details of recording 
are described in Lateral Arm-Movement. 

But the asymmetry of tremolo is the result also of differences 
in the normal strength of the two muscle-groups. The muscles of 
supination are stronger than those of pronation. In forcn^ a 
screw-driver we do so with the stronger group : the supinators. 
As a result of this difference the accentuation of the JBfth finger is 
easier m an octave tremolo than that of the thumb. The tendency 
of pupils to play passages such as that in Fig. 87, a, with the accent 
as at 6, is, in part at least, the direct result of this muscular difference. 


194 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

In teaching fore-aim rotation movements of pronation and 
supination are usually taught simultaneously. liom a physio- 
logical stand-point, supination is much more natural, hence may 
advantageously be taught jSrst. It plays a much more important 
role in piano literature than the pronation. In point of biological 
fundamentality fore-arm motion is an early coordination. Its use 
in even elementary piano work need not, therefore, be deferred. 
Small children use it freely, since it is a natural physiological move- 
ment. At the same time, in some modified form it is in almost 
constant use in any advanced piano technique. Pronating beyond 
the horizontal hand-position (pivoting on the thumb and bringing 
the fifth fitnger over it) is a less natural movement at that range and 
demands much more training for its proper acquisition. As a result 
we frequently fibnd a typical irregularity in the tremolo of pupils 
insufiSciently prepared and this irregularity may often be traced 
to the added difficulty of excess pronation. The two touches, 
supination and pronation, may well be taught separately to 
advantage, before combining them, since physiologically they are 
not reciprocal movements. 

Another phase of the tremolo movement that is often overlooked 
is that, as soon as the movement is carried beyond the point where 
the fifth finger comes into contact with the key, the movement 
changes from a fore-arm to an upper arm rotation. This is inevitable, 
because the hand is lifted as it rests upon the fitfth finger and a lift 
of the fore-arm, with bent elbow can occur only with rotation of the 
upper arm in the shoulder-joint. Therefore, if the pedagogic 
problem be to drill fore-arm rotation, the movement should be carried 
only to the point where the fifth finger depresses the key, and not 
to the vertical position over the fiLfth finger. The latter position, 
unless the hand sinks upon the key or is awkwardly flexed at the 
wrist, can be reached only with some upper arm (humerus) rotation. 

Finally, the best range of the keyboard for practising the tremolo 
at the beginning, is the point at which the elbow is approximately 
flexed to a ri^t angle with moderate humerus abduction. This 
would be about the fct octave above the treble clef for the right 
hand when the player is seated normally at the keyboard. Further 
extension than that begins to result in adding some upper arm 
rotation, while playing nearer the centre of the keyboard demands 
an abduction at the wrist that interferes with the proper projection 
of the axis of rotation. 
jRdative Intensity, 

The value of fore-arm rotation, which is nothing more than an 
elaboration of the tremolo movement, is determined also by the 



TREMOLO 196 

relative intensities of the tones comprising the passage in question. 
In a spread chord-figure, for example as at o Fig. 88, it is perfectly 
easy to accent tiie end tones by using the fore-arm rotation. But 
let the metrical accent &11 on an intermediate tone as at h, and 
the tremolo or fore-arm rotation not only becomes useless, but also 
interferes seriously with the adequate performance of the movement. 
In such cases finger-strength is the only safe means of securing 
the dynamic contrast. It is this relationrfiip that is at the bottom 
of sudh typical diflSiculties as those in the firk Czerny Etude in the 
School of Velocity, where the right hand has the D accented in 
the descending fii^e P-E-D-A, and the closing measures of No. 9, 
where the accmt is demanded of the fourth finger with the fingers 
in an abducted position : the most difficult position for sudh an 
accent. Parts of Mendelssohn’s Spinning Song are further examples. 


> ^ > - > ^ > 


z±±z 

mmimiWM 

h- 

I# 

mmimjmm 


■ Hr ■■■■I V MHI HHHH ■ 

^ 

Fig. 88. 

^ y 


Sudh ‘figures point out clearly the need for developing finger- 
strength as against the arm-wei^t pedagogy, and for usemg finger- 
tremolo instead of fore-arm tremolo. 

MovemmIrPJme. 

In the arm-tremolo touch the positive and negative phases are 
not readQy kept apart. This is because the movement is one of 
fore-arm rotation, and the rotation in either direction is movement 
toward tone-production. Both sides, therefore, are psitive move- 
ments. Moreover, since the depression on one side is necessarily 
accompanied by a correspnding ascent on the other side, the thumb 
passes through its psitive phase as the fifth finger passes throu^ 
its negative phase, and vice versa. But, so &r as the fore-arm 
movement itself is concerned, it has no negative phase. Conse- 
quently, this characteristic of many piano touches is absent in the 
tremolo touch. 


CHAPTER XVI 
Staccato 

The two essential characteristics of all staccato touches are the 
shortness of the tone and its tonal separation from the preceding 
and suoc^ding tones. A tone merely of short duration, but 
connected to some other tone is not a staccato tone, regardless of 
its own agogic value. Nor is a tone staccato when it is merely 
separated from other tones. Both brevity and tonal isolation are^ 
necessary for a true staccato effect. Just where this brevity and 
tonal isolation begin or end is a point often difficult to determine. 
Variations in them shade by imperceptible degrees into non- 
staccato, and light portamento. All such terms, we must remember, 
are but convenient designations along a continuous scale, and the 
terms become definite only when the salient features are well marked. 
Consequently, in the following analysis of the staccato touches, 
both brevity and isolation will be assumed to be clearly present. 

Staccato touches differ from legato not in their effect on the 
beginning of tone, but on the ending of tone. Key-release, not 
key-depression, becomes the physical determinant. The piano- 
key, contrary to popular belief, is not an elastic body in the sense 
that its ascent results from an elasticity with compression by the 
preceding descent. It rises because of impact with its reversal 
of force-action, and because the mner arm of the key-lever is heavier 
than the outer and is pulled down by gravity when resistance on 
the outer, lighter aim is released. The direction in which the arm 
is held during key-release has no direct effect, since the movement 
of the piano-key is fixed both as to range and direction, and up to 
a certain point also as to speed. By lifting the hand very rapidly 
from the key we do not hasten the key’s ascent. This is fixed by 
the action of gravity, and affected only to a very small extent 
indeed by the force of the rebounding hammer, the check of which 
is so constructed that this force acts at a very poor angle with 
regard to the rebounding hammer. The finger can delay key-ascent 
to any desired degree, but it cannot accelerate it beyond the point 
established by the construction of the action. 

This independence of key-ascent from finger-ascent is illustrated 
in Eg. 89 in which the curves represent the ascent of the piano-key. 

196 



STACCATO 


197 


a shows tke ascent for a light staccato, 6 for a forte staccato, 
equivalent to a martellato. The time-line is in fiftieths of a second. 
Kegardless of the speed of key-depression, its ascent remains both 
slower and irregular, in these cases requiring between 2 and 3 
fiftieths of a second for its completion. Fig. 204, in the chapter on 
Tone Qualities, also shows this impossibility of accelerating key- 
ascent. The upper line in this figure records the ascent of the finger 
itself, the lower line that of the key. Hence the finger-tip leaves 
the key-surface a moment after key-ascent begins, while the key 
continues its ascent at a much slower rate. Since tone-beginning 
takes place practically at the moment of hammer-escapement, 
represented in these curves at a point near the bottom of the curve, 
the shortest tone possible on the piano with full key-depression, 
measured solely by key-movement, lasts approximately two- 
fiftieths of a second. Under all practical conditions it is consider- 
ably longer. 

vvwwwv^ 


a 




Fig. 89. 


The duration of the contact of finger-tip and key, in these touches, 
is not equal to that of the tone. The tone produced is longer than the 
finger-key contact and the extreme staccatissimo effects are an 
auditory illusion resulting from the brevity of the kinesthetic 
and visual sensations. The tone is not as short as we imagine it is. 
(See in this connection the paragraph on Imagery in the chapter 
on Tone Qualities.) 

This digression into the physical field was necessary in order to 
account for the adoption of certain movements for staccato effects. 
The purpose of all staccato effects is shortness of tone, which in 
turn demands key-ascent. The appropriate touch is one permitting 
the key to ascend as soon as possible. Since all tone-production 
begins with some form of down-stroke, the change from down to 
up-stroke becomes the crucial point in staccato touches. This 
change involves a marked change in direction, which, in turn, 
consumes time. Such an abrupt change in direction, as we shall 



198 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

learn later, is difficult from a physiological, and awkward from a 
mechanical point of view. 

In staccato touches the weight of the arm is carried by the 
shoulder muscles. There can be no weight resting upon the keys 
in any staccato form. A part of the arm is then permitted to fall 
upon, or is forced down upon the key, whereupon it is immediately 
withdrawn. According to the part thus used, the type of touch is 
called hand, arm, or finger staccato. 

Hand-Staccato. 

In this touch the hand is the playing-unit. Fore-arm and upper 
arm are held stationary over the key-level. The dorsal flexors 
of the wrist are held contracted to keep the hand from falling upon 
the keys. When these muscles are relaxed, the hand will descend 
upon the key either through the action of gravity, or through 




appropriate contraction of the volar flexors. The problem of 
individual differences has a direct effect here. The production 
of tone demands a certain velocity at key-impact. The hand of 
an adult, weighing normally between half a pound and a pound, 
loay gain the desired velocity of its own weight. The hand of a child, 
weighing considerably less, will gain less velocity. If the latter 
be insufficient it can be increased only by adding appropriate 
muscular contraction to the falling hand. As the hand reaches 
the key, the extensors of the wrist are rapidly contracted, bringing 
the hand back into its original position. At the moment of key- 
impact the force adjustment at the finger-tip carries over into 
the wrist and produces the wrist-jerk, typical of all staccato touches. 
Tim jerk must not be confused with the wrist-ascent resulting from 



STACCATO 


199 

a shift of the fulcrum forward from the wrist, as shown in Fig. 90. 
Here the wrist rises and falls as one end of a lever the fulcrum of 
which has been shifted from the wrist as in the lower figure, to 
a position between the wrist and the fingers, as at in the upper 
figure. The lower illustration shows a true hand-staccato. 
Physiologically and mechanically they are different movements. 

The wrist-jerk is a necessary mechanical resultant of the finger- 
key impact. The muscles responsible for key-depression are acting 
downward. Their function is to change the angle of the bones 
at the wrist, for in a true hand-staccato the wrist is the only joint 
in which motion occurs. When the descent of the finger-tip is stopped 
by key-resistance, the continued contraction of the hand-flexors 
will increase the angle of flexion by raising the wrist. The 
mechanical principle operating here is that analysed under shift of 
fulcrum in the preceding paragraph. (See also Action and Keaction.) 
The mechanical arm illustrates it quite nicely so far as the actual 


Wrtit ^ 



Rg. 91. 


direction of motion is concerned, whereas the following esperiment 
will demonstrate the distribution of the forces: 

Since hand-staccato demands a relatively stationary wrist, this 
may be placed upon a spring balance, appropriately arranged in 
front of the keyboard. The balance will then register the weight 
of a part of the arm. Of course, in an actual staccato this weight 
is carried by the arm muscles. If, now, the hand be thrown against 
the keys in a typical staccato touch, the balance will show a reduc- 
tion in weight at the wrist, at the moment of finger-key impact. 
This reduction varies directly with the amount of force at ihe finger- 
tip, whether the strokes be intermittent, or whether a sustained 
pressure (necessarily non-staccato) be employed. Typical curves 
are shown in Fig. 91. The curve for the key was made 
by a pneumatic recorder placed beneath the piano-key, so that 
addition in pressure was reflected by a greater displacement in 
the recording pen. Depression in this line indicates pressure, 



200 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

the deeper the depression, the greater the pressure. In the curve 
for the wrist, which was made by attaching an appropriate stylus 
to the spring balance carrying the wrist, greater upward deflection 
means greater loss of weight. An ascent in this line, therefore, shows 
a release of weight— hence an upward acting force — ^a descent in 
the line, an increase in weight. Ihe curves a show the distributions 
of the forces for a sustained (non-staccato) touch, those at b for 
a staccato touch. The interaction is clearly seen : a depression 
of one line is accompanied by an ascent in the other line. 

Moreover, in the slow touch-form of sostenuto, shown at a, time 
is lost in bringing the weight at the wrist down sufficiently to enable 
the finger to depress the key. This phase of movement has been 
discussed in detail under ^ordination. With the arm resting 
freely at the wrist, or in other words with the wrist in full relaxation, 
the finger would have no fixed fulcrum from which to work— for 
the wrist fixation determines the hand-knuckle position. So that 





Fio. 92. 


the actual depression of the piano-key is preceded by a slight 
of the wrist, which in turn releases a small part of the wei^t. For 
this reason we find the wrist line in a of Fig. 91 beginning its rise 
slig^itly in advance of key-depression. In the rapid staccato touch 
this difference is too small to show on the scale of projection 
here used. 

The fact that the actual amount of weight-release at the wrist 
parallels the increase at the finger-tip may be demonstrated by 
recording the movements m a series of staccato touches TnaTn'rig 
a crescendo and diminuendo. If the observations just made are 
true, the deflections in both fines should increase with the crescendo 
and decrease with the diminuendo. Fig. 92 a shows this to be so. 
b in the sme figure illustrates the force-distribution at finger- 
tip and wrist when the crescendo and diminuendo are made with 
unbroken pressure. Pianistically, of course, such a touch is 
absolutely unless. It serves, however, to show beyond any doubt 
the interaction of the forces we are considering. 



STACCATO 


201 


In order to overcome the key-resistance promptly and effectively 
the finger-joints must be fixed sufficiently. The tendons producing 
flexion of the nail and middle finger-joints pass under the wrist. 
Excessive flexion of the fingers, accordingly, would increase some- 
what the difficulty of keeping the wrist-joint relaxed since the 
tension of these tendons would inhibit complete freedom of move- 
ment. This would aid in hand-descent, but interfere in hand- 
ascent. Fingers, curved only in nail and first inteiphalangeal joints, 
therefore, make a hand-staccato touch more difficult. Contraction 
of the hand-muscles, producing flexion at the hand-knuckles, 
relieves this tension on the wrist because, of the three sets of muscles 
situated in the hand, aU of which contribute to the flexion of the 
first finger-joint (next to the hand-knuckle), two sets take their 
origin from the sides of the bones in the hand. As a result the 
contraction of these muscles is without effect on the wrist. The 
remaining set, the lumbricales, although they have their origin 
in the flexor tendons that pass beneath the wrist, exert a pull in 



Fig. 93. 


an opposite direction to that of the finger-flexors themselves. 
These effects are shown in Fig. 93, in which a, b, are finger-joints ; 
c, hand-knuckles ; d, wrist ; e-f, tendon and muscle of one of the 
palmar muscles ; g-h, tendon of the flexor of finger-joints. When 
the finger-joint b is fiexed, the tendon g-h becomes shorter and 
exerts a mild pull on d, striving to get a straight line between 
g and h. This resistance must be overcome by lifting the hand 
backward at the wrist during such a contraction. If, instead of 
this contraction, the palmar interossei contract e-f wiU take the 
position shown by e^-/, a change which in no way affects the 
wrist, while still bringing the finger-tip into playing position. 

For the same reason any finger-action during the hand-staccato 
stroke makes the latter more difficult to execute, because move- 
ment in the finger- joints is normally accompanied by a compensatory 
fixing of the wrist in order to meet the resistance to be overcome. 
And this fixing of the wrist interferes with the freedom of wrist- 
movement in hand-staccato. The fixing likewise accompanies 


202 TOUCH-FOKMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

abduction of the fingers, which, as we have seen, is closely linked 
with extension of the wrist. To flex the wrist while the fingers 
are widely spread is an unnatural, and, at first, tiring movement 
and accoimts for the “ tired wrist of pupils beginning staccato 
octaves. 

The natural procedure to follow in the teaching of hand-staccato 
is first to arch the hand by contracting the palm muscles, and then 
to keep the fingers close together. A very useful position is that 
shown in Fig. playing single keys with the third finger. The 
thumb being pressed against this finger makes finger-movement 
impossible- The drawing under of the fourth and fiLfth fingers is 
the opposite extreme of the spread fingers. Consequently, the hand 
is in the most favourable position for hand-staccato. From such 
a position the transition should be made to playing staccato 
thMs with second and fourth fingers ; and then to wider intervals, 
reserving octaves until all intervening intervals have been mastered. 

The distribution of muscular activity is further complicated 
by the actual position of, or the amount of curvature in the fibagers. 
With the nail-joint strildng the key in an approximately vertical 
position contraction of the muscles controlling action at this joint 
is materially reduced since the position directs the force of key- 
resistance against the bone-ends. Flat fingers demand contraction 
of the flexor profundis to prevent breakmg-in of the nail-joints, 
and this contraction influences wrist movement since the tendon 
of this muscle passes under the wrist. Curved fibagers are therefore 
preferable to flat fingers in teaching hand-staccato. The thumb 
and fibEth fingers have their own flexors (flexor brevis poUicis and 
flexor brevis minimi digiti) and hence these fingers may be flexed 
without afieeting the wrist-joint as affected by the other fingers. 
The origins of these muscles lie in the hand itself, that of the former 
in the trapezium and the front of the annular ligament ; that of 
the latter in the carpal bones. On this account it is advisable 
to begin the staccato work of the first and fifth fingers with intervals 
as small even as a third, leading by steps into the octave. The basic 
fact to remember, in all hand staccato touches, is that the wider 
the spread of the fibagers, the greater the fixation of the wrist. 

The presence or absence of muscular contraction in the descending 
part of the hand-staccato may be determined by the pneumatic 
tambour. This is held against the flexor carpi radialis, the muscle 
controlling volar wrist flexion. The muscle is prominently situated 
in the under part of the fore-arm. If the hand is thrown against 
the key, this muscle will contract at the beginning of hand-descent. 
A typical record is given in Fig. 98, where the upper line records 



TAX 



[To face p, 202 



STACCATO 


203 


tlie contraction of tlie mnscle, tlie lower line tlie key-depression. 
The muscular contraction has taken place entirely before the key 
is reached ; the two arrows showing respectively the beginning 
of contraction and beginning of key-depression. Difference in 
time is five-fiftieths of a second. 


Arm^Staccato. 

In this touch-form the wrist is relatively rigid and the fore- 
arm, or, sometimes, the whole arm is thrown against the keys. 
The maimer in which this is done depends largely upon the part 
of the keyboard used, because the tou^ remains a vertical descent 
and ascent, and the effect of the region of the keyboard upon 
vertical arm-descent has been analysed on p. 25. (See also Fig. 95.) 

Since the part moving has a greater mass than the hand alone, 
and since the duration of tone is supposed to be just as short, it 
follows that a greater muscular contraction will be needed to control 
the change of direction at the moment of impact. It follows also, 
other things equal, that the force acting upon the key wiU be greater, 
if the velocity of the descending hand equals that of the 
descending arm. 

If the entire arm is used its descent results from a relaxation 
of the shoulder muscles, thus letting gravity act on the arm, or 
from contraction of the arm adductors and depressors. Motion takes 
place in the shoulder-joint ; and motion in the elbow takes place 
in inverse ratio to the an^e of humerus abduction. A marked 
degree of muscular fixation is necessary for this touch-form, par- 
ticularly when elbow-flexion approaches a right angle and the 
humerus is held horizontal. In this case the point at which key- 
resistance acts is at a considerable distance from the axis of 
depression, which is at the elbow. The resistance of the keys, there- 
fore, at this leverage introduces a considerable force which tends to 
rotate the humerus backward. To overcome this the forward 
rotators are contracted. Moreover, the leverage system at work 
in such a touch is at a mechanical disadvantage in producing 
force at the finger-tip, because the leverage gains in speed, hence 
loses in force. I can find neither physiological nor mechanical 
advantage in playing staccato from the entire arm. 

The usual fore-arm staccato results also from a rotation of the 
humerus, plus elbow flexion and extension ; but since the elbow is 
lower than in the case just cited, the leverage has a mechanical 
advantage. (See p. 128.) When the humerus is vertical the inter- 
action of forces is, therefore, direct and opposite. The necessary 
adjustment at the moment of reversal of direction is more accurately 



204 TOUOH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

made because no forces are acting to produce motion outside of tie 
plane of movement. As tbe upper arm is drawn nearer tbe side 
of the body the movement of rotation in the shoulder gradually 
gives way to an extension and flexion of the elbow. The favourable 
plane of action remains. As a matter of fact the so-caUed fore-arm 
staccato that results from humerus rotation is not a fore-arm 
movement at all. It is a whole-arm movement, with the partici- 
pation of the humerus obscured by the fact that this bone is rotating 
on its own longitudinal axis, hence does not itself change its spatial 
relationship to the body. 

Change of PosUion. 

In plajring, let us say, diatonic staccato octaves with the right 
hand from middle C ascending through two octaves, we begin with 
a movement almost entirely elbow flexion and extension (see 
Pig. 95), and we end with a movement that is almost entirely 



humerus rotation. To speak of an arm-staccato, therefore, regardless 
of its exact location on the keyboard, is to ignore the underlying 
physiological basis. If the keys played are near the centre of the 
keyboard the movement is made by the fore-arm, acting at the 
elbow ; iE played near the extremes of the keyboard the move- 
ment is m^e by rotation in the shoulder. Naturally, entirely 
different muscular coordinations are needed. The muscles bending 
and extendmg the elbow are situated m the upper arm : biceps, 
brachialis, brachioradialis, and pronator-teres for flexion, triceps 
for extension, whereas those rotating the shoulder are located in 
the chest, neck, and upper back: subscapularis, mfraspinatus, 
and teres minor. The transition from one to the other extreme 
as the hand ascends along the keyboard is very gradual and is 
another striking illustration of the fallacy of muscular isolation. 

For the sake of more clearly illustratmg this shift of coordination 
the two extremes are shown m Fig. 95, drawn in isometric projection 



STACCATO 


205 


so as to take care of tke several planes of movement. When near 
the centre of the keyboard, the vertical movement of the hand 
(shown by the dotted line) results from d rotating on axis h. When 
the hand has reached the high treble region the positions of the 
upper arm and lower arm are approximately as shown in and 
cP. In this position vertical movement of can take place only by 
rotation around axis since axis 6^ is in line with the plane of 
motion. 


Dynarmc Variations. 

The effect of variations in tonal intensity upon the muscular 
coordinations used in staccato touches is similar to that in other 
touches : the greater the intensity the greater the spread of muscular 
activity, both as to movement and as to fixation. The increase 
in force demanded by an increase in tonal intensity may be gained 
either by increasing the velocity of the playing body or by increasing 
its mass. An increase in velocity means a more intense muscular 
contraction and a correspondingly greater fixation to take care 
of the reaction. Thus, in hand-staccato, it is possible to increase 
the intensity of the tones without resorting to arm-staccato, by 
a more powerful contraction of the wrist-flexors. But the position 
of the parts is such that the gain in force, resulting from a gain in 
speed, works at a mechanical disadvantage, because force, not 
speed, is the aim of the movement. Consequently, to play staccato 
octaves, let us mj, forte ot fortissimo by violent contraction of the 
wrist flexors, is to work at a decided physiological disadvantage. 
I know of at least two instances where faihire to take the underlying 
mechanical principles into account resulted in a tearing of the flexor 
of the fifth finger, where it passes the wrist. This, by the way, is 
at least one example where a knowledge of the muscles, their 
fimction, and the mechanical principles involved would have been 
of decided practical value. 

The second means of securing the desured dynamic degree is to 
increase the mass of the playing-unit. This method substitutes the 
arm-staccato for the hand-staccato in the louder tones. Since 
the hand no longer need turn at the wrist as an axis, its position 
may be changed so that the key-resistance acts against the skeletal 
structure of the hand. Finger, hand, and fore-arm are brought more 
nearly into the skeletal position {Fig. 186). The change from the 
position of hand-staccato is not abrupt. A succession of staccato 
octaves, for instance, with a crescendo of sufiicient range will begin 
with a pure hand-staccato and end with an entire arm-staccato, 
with all grades of admixture between. Here, again, the muscular 



206 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

cc^rdiaation used at the beginning will differ radically from that 
used at the end. Muscles used to fix a joint are later used to move 
it ; others used to move a joint are later used to fix it. 


i^A^\|lAAAMAAAlV(UUVAAAA^A^JUKA^ik/wwv/«i\AAAAl\ 


k fl i I /i 4 i dji « 1 1 



ft 


Fig. 96 . 

Not only the spread of activity through the upper arm marks a 
staccato crescendo, but also the position of the arm itself. The 
latter varies in accordance with the principle of substituting the 
resistance of the bones for that of the muscles to any force 
of considerable intensity. 


STACCATO 


207 


Agogic Variations. 

The influence of speed on staccato may be learned from the 
study of any repeated movement. Assuming the position of the arm 
to be stationary in regard to the region of the keyboard used — as, 
fox instance, its use in repeated octaves— we have for study a rapidly 
alternating movement of hand or arm descent and ascent. As the 
speed increases the time for changing descent into ascent becomes 
less. The contracting muscles wUl, therefore, act more strongly, 
and this type of contraction plays over into adjoining parts which 
act as points of relative fixation. This gives rise to the familiar 
spread of tension which accompanies an increase in the speed of 
repetition of a movement. A conspicuous illustration is furnished by 
the tapping test. The standard form of this test is given on a metal 
board tapped by a metal stylus held in the hand. Such a procedure 
destroys the most salient feature of the indiridual responses. By 
using an improved form of recording lever — d 3 niamograph of 
which the amplitude of the stylus fluctuations records variations 
in force — this difficulty is eliminated. Three sets of records are 
given in Fig. 96. They represent the curves obtained when a 
pupil is asked to tap just as rapidly as possible, to see how many 
taps you can make in a given time The top set of curves shows 
the result for a very talented, trained pupil who used an extremely 
light touch, accompanied by a gentle steady raising and lowering 
of the wrist, thus combining the taps into muscular higher-units. 
These are shown by the wave-like crests. The middle set of curves 
were made by a pupil of normal technical ability. They show 
greater expenditure of force and a moderate reduction in speed. The 
control is fairly good. The bottom records were made by a most 
untalented pupil and show, vividly enough, the spread of tension. 
In this case the entire body was rigid and a tremendous energy — 
totally misdirected — was used, ^e speed, on account of the 
incoordination, naturally was low. 

The spread of tension with speed, however, is not in itself an 
incoordinated movement. The velocity of the moving hand is 
greater than in slow movements, hence its force is greater. But 
since intensity is supposed to remain constant, this additional force 
must be counteracted by appropriate contraction of the antagonistic 
muscles just before tone-production. Such contraction m turn 
must have a fulcrum from which to act upon the hand. And this 
fulcrum to meet the additional force, must be fixed to a greater 
extent than before. The spread of muscular contraction is, conse- 
quently, greater. The difference is not in the turn from descent 
to accent, because, m any real staccato, this is supposed to be as 



208 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

short as possible. It is in the rapid reversal of direction from ascent 
to the following descent, which, in a single staccato stroke, is not 
necessary. 

In a single staccato stroke the contraction of the muscles for 
hand-lift may take place to any extent in order to insure shortness 
of tone. Excess contraction will throw the hand back farther, but 
since there is no need for a succeeding descent, the greater time 
required to bring the hand to rest does not interfere wi^ the move- 
ment. In tone repetition, however, it is just as necessary to initiate 


mascle 


WWV\AAAAAAA/\AAAA^^ 
Fio. 97. 


the second descent promptly, as it is the first ascent. Inhibition 
of excess lift, therefore, becomes necessary. By examining a single 
stroke we can learn when this contraction takes place. 

In Fig. 97 the key-movement was recorded by means of a direct 
lever attached to the key, and the muscular contraction by means of 
a pneumatic tambour. 

The contraction of the muscle begins slightly in advance of key- 
depression, and at the moment at which the finger reaches the key, 
the extensor carpi radialis (the muscle primarily controlling the 


VAAAAAAAAA 


t 

Fig. 98. 

hand-lift in hand-staccato) is already partly contracted. The 
maximal point is reached a moment later, before the key has 
been actually fully depressed. The time-line is in fiftieths of 
seconds. 

A similar contraction of the flexor carpi radialis — the muscle 
initiating hand-descent in staccato — stakes place early in the down- 
stroke (Pig. 98). The muscle contracts, aided somewhat by gravity 
and is already relaxed before the hand reaches the key, because the 
rise in the upper line, representing muscular contraction, is as a whole 



STACCATO 


209 

to the left of the beginning of key-ascent, marked by the lower 
arrow at the extreme right side of the figure. The duration of this 
particular stroke, as the time-line shows, was one-tenth of a second. 

In staccato touches, therefore, the muscles antagonistic to the 
actual movement taking place contract during that movement. 
But their pulls are not equal. The asymmetry present in many 
reciprocal movements is found also at the wrist, ilexion at this joint 
is considerably stronger than extension. The force of a down-stroke 
of the hand is greater than that of an up-stroke. This is as it should 
be, since the up-stroke has as its sole aim the lifting of the hand- 
weight, and not the overcoming of external (key) resistance. When 
the pupil’s attention is unduly directed toward ascent, additional 
force is expended against the restraining tissues on the under side 
of the wrist, and is wasted energy. It frequently results in an 
awkward position and movement of the hand, similar to that found 
in finger-staccato when the attention is directed to the finger-lift 
instead of finger-descent. 


Vibrato 

A very fast succession of staccato movements, more especially 
in the louder dynamic degrees, constitutes what is known as the 
vibrato touch. As a rule, this touch can be sustained for a short 
passage only, the reason for which we shall see in a moment. The 
characteristic feature of this touch-form is the state of hyper-tension 
in which the wrist and arm are held. By simultaneously contracting 
the extensors and flexors of the wrist the carpal bones are pressed 
upon the distal ends of the radius and the ulna. The hand thus 
becomes a unit with the fore-arm, and its weight as a separate 
unit is withdrawn from the keyboard. The mechanical arm 
illustrates this nicely ; by appropriate contraction of the strings 
acting as muscles the hand may be maintained in the air in a 
horizontal direction (opposing the action of gravity) although the 
wrist-joint (set-screw' of the mechanical arm) be itself relaxed. 
Any “ give ” at the wrist-joint woidd, in the touch-form we are here 
considering, interfere with the speed of movement. This interference 
may be illustrated by moving rapidly up and down a rigid stick held 
in the hand, and then doing the same thing with a stick of equal 
length but hinged in two or three places. In the latter case the 
variation in force-direction resultmg from the spatial displace- 
ments of the various pa.rts, makes both speed and accuracy 
impossible. The degree of lids awkwardness depends upon the 
degree of relaxation in the joints. Here, then, we have a touch-form 
that demands utmost rigidity for its proper execution. 



210 TOUCEH-FOBMB OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

One nse of this touch-form is with bent elbow and abducted 
humerus, in which position movement of the hand results not from 
elbow movement, but from rotation of the upper arm (see vertical 
movements). This rotation is axial, that is to say it occurs around 
the humerus itself as an axis. The centre of gravity of the moving 
ps^ is thus displaced from hand to a point close to the elbow. This 
joint region and the upper arm make up the heavier part of the 
moving arm, the tapering fore-arm and fingers make up the lighter 
part. At the same time the contraction of the entire muscular 



f 


Frc, 99. 

system of the arm fixes this to some extent in the shoulder, thus 
counteracting, to that extent, the action of gravity. This is 
n^essaiy, because in vertical movements arm-descent is in line 
of gravity whereas arm-ascent is directly opposed 
to it. wei^t of the arm, and the distance of its normal centre 
01 gravi^ from the shoulder are sufficiently great to make this 
alternating action a serious interference with the speed of the 
movement. Ti^ mechanical principle involved may be illustrated 
^ lohows : A, Fig. 99 represents the arm-mass in its relaxed form • 
Its mass m the vibrato fixation. In both cases/is the fulcrum and 



STACCATO 


211 


c represents the centre of mass. The difference in the length of 
fc and/^ shows the difference in efficiency for executing a rapid 
movement in the direction of the arrows. In the first figure in 
order to move the point through the distance 5-c, the centre of mass 
must be moved through a-h ; in the second illustration, to move 
through an equal distance the centre of mass needs to be 
moved only through a^-b\ Hence less work is done. 

If fixation actually occurs, we shall find when we record the 
muscular contractions for this touch-form that both flexors and 
extensors, in the case of a hand-staccato, and both forward and 
backward rotators of the shoulder are in simultaneous contraction. 
Otherwise we could not speak of fixation. Moreover this contraction 
is a necessary conclusion from the analysis of the staccato stroke 
described earlier in this chapter. There it was shown that the 
muscles controlling hand-descent were contracted while the hand 



was still ascending and those controlling hand-ascent were con- 
tracted while the hand was still descending. If the repetition of 
stroke be very fast, the two will of course overlap, and we have 
what may be aptly described as a voluntary tetanus. 

Fig. 100 shows the contraction of the two muscles controlling 
wrist flexion and extension. The figure was a series of five staccato 
touches in very rapid succession and at forte intensity. The curves 
should not be read for comparison of the small fluctuations at the 
crest of the lines, because I could not be sure that the pneumatic 
recording device did not permit some play. The salient feature, 
however, of the simultaneous contraction of both flexors and 
extensors is seen clearly in the deflection of both lines, which occurs 
at the same time. 

The presence of muscular fixation may also be shown by recording 
the contraction of either extensor or flexor and at the same time 
recording the movement of the piano-key. The result is given in 
Fig. 101, which diows the contraction of the extensor carpi radialis 
(the muscle primarily concerned with lifting the hand in staccato) 
during a series of five vibrato octaves, played, of course, at a very 
rapid tempo. The movement of the muscle was recorded by means 



212 TOUCH-tORMS Of PIANO TECHNIQUE 

of a pneumatic tambour, that of the key by a direct lever attach- 
ment with slight magnification of amplitude and reversal of direc- 
tion. A rise in the muscle-line indicates muscular contraction, a 
rise in the key-line indicates key-depression . The five staccato key- 
movements are very marked, and the key returns its full distance 
between each stroke since the troughs go to, and even below, the 



mmmmwmmmmm 



Fig. 101. 


stationary key-level shown at either side by the horizontal stretch 
of line. The time-line shown in the middle is in fiftieths of seconds 
so that the strokes followed each other at approximately one-tenth 
of a second. The muscular contraction on the other hand, does 
not show the separate strokes. Instead, it remains almost at a 
uniform degree of contraction throughout the five hand-ascents 
and hand-descents. The partial relaxation shown between the first 
and second strokes (the lines should be read from left to right) may 
result from an incomplete fixation at the beginning of the group, 
although tambour fluctuation is also possible. The marked difference 
in the two curves illustrates clearly the continuity of the muscular 
contraction in the vibrato touch, and the discontmuity of the tonal 
result. It is an additional example of the lack of agreement between 
a muscular condition and the auditory effect. To a non-pianist, 
not seeing the player, the lightness and the detached character of 
vibrato octaves conveys no idea of the muscular tension experienced 
by the player. The reactions of the two will, therefore, differ 
similarly. 

Hand and WriM Extmsion. 

An mteresting variation in muscular activity is found in hand 
extension with and without curved or flexed fingers. Normally 
when the hand is extended with extended fingers the true wrist- 
extensors (extensors carpi radialis and ulnaris) contract very little, 



STACCATO 213 

the extension at the wrist being the result of the contraction of the 
extensors of the ittngers which pass the wrist. But when the wrist 
is extended with curved fingers, the wrist extensors contract 
noticeably. Thus staccato octaves played with extended fingers 
are produced by a muscular contraction different from that for 
staccato thirds or sixths, where the fingers are vrell flexed. If the 
movement be made with the finger extensors primarily, their 
contraction must be accompanied by a simultaneous contraction 
of the wrist-flexors, to keep the wrist from sinking. (It is the 
opposite of the condition described for finger-stroke on p. 218.) 
This is a coordination among false antagonists, since the true 
antagonists of the wrist flexors are the wrist extensors. The feeling 
of strain and fatigue, characteristic of first attempts at staccato 
octaves, is the result of doing the hand extension or lift with the 
finger muscles instead of the hand muscles. By keeping the fingers 
curved, we at once shift the work to the proper wrist muscles and 
make it impossible for the finger extensors to act. That is why 
hand staccato can best be taught in thirds and sixths before pro- 
ceeding to octaves. The less the fingers are extended the more do 
the wrist muscles act. It is another instance of where a knowledge 
of physiology is of practical help to the teacher. 

The early onset of fatigue in vibrato touches is the result of the 
fact that a muscle in a stationary contracted state, without 
appropriate movement or periods of relaxation, always interferes 
seriously with the circulation within the muscle, damming up the 
waste products. The physiologists have shown that the efficiency 
of muscular action depends directly upon this elimination. In 
ordinary usage the periods of muscular relaxation following those 
of contraction offer ample opportunity for the removal of the 
chemical waste by the blood and thus prevent the onset of fatigue. 

Newral Phase, 

The advantage of the vibrato coordination is not only in the 
direct mechanical gain, but also in the greater speed with which 
the neural impulses can act upon the muscles ; an illustration of 
the manner in which nature gains speed of movement in spite of 
muscular rigidity. 

Assume simultaneous contraction of both forward and backward 
rotators of the humerus sufficient to move the parts of the arm 
needed. Let A be the forward rotators, the contraction of which, 
with abducted humerus and flexed elbow brings the hand down upon 
the keyboard; let B be the backward rotators, contraction of 



214 TOUCH-IOEMS OF PIAIfO TECHNIQUE 

wMch lifts tie hand from the keyboard. Both are contracted 
mffir.iftnt ly to move the arm readily, hut because both are simul- 
taneously contracted, the force-ellect of either is neutralized by the 
other, and lie arm does not move, but remains fixed. A sudden 
increase in the contraction of A turns the humerus forward and 
ImngR the hand down. Mere release of this additional contraction 
causes the humerus to rotate back again, since B still remains 
contracted. Whereupon a second contraction of A causes a second 
hand-descent. In the case of a relaxed arm, stimuli would have to 
go altematingly to both A and B in order to produce contraction, 
in the state of fixation, on the other hand, the only stimulus is a 
plus pull on either side but not on both. Thus the nmnber of neural 
stimuli needed is half of that needed for executing the movement 
in a relaxed manner. The very small range of muscular contraction 
needed, on account of the favourable position of the muscles, as 
well as the power of the muscles themselves (shoulder muscles as 
compared to finger muscles, for example) make possible an 
instwtaneous transfer of force. 

This condition may be experimentally proved by the mechanical 
arm. For this purpose the cords representing one set of muscles are 
fixed. When the antagonistic set is then pulled it will have to 
overcome this resistance before movement can result. Consequently, 
the force will be greater. As soon as this force ceases to act, the 
sustained contraction of the fixed set will jerk the lever back 
immediately. A much more rapid back-and-forward movement 
may thus be secured than by altematingly pulling the cords of the 
antagonistic forces. 

To the mechanical proof may be added the physiological. A state 
of hyper-tension is biologically wasteful ; much of the work done 
is “ wasted work ”, so far as the force of the final movement is 
concerned. Accordingly, we should expect an early onset of fatigue, 
which is nature’s reaction to overwork And this is exactly what 
happens. There is no other touch-form so “ tiring ” as the vibrato, 
and, as a result, we find its use primarily in very short passages or 
groups, with muscular rest periods between. 

Finally, in the vibrato touch we find the one instance in whieh 
we can properly speak of an elastic condition of the muscles. When 
the additional contraction producing the movement ceases, the 
body moved returns to its original position by virtue of a force 
already acting during the time of displacement. This is the basic 
property of elasticity. It is totally difierent from the countless 
misleadjng applications of the word to key, touch, and arm. 



STACCATO 216 

Finger-Staccato 

A detailed analysis of finger-strokes, including finger-staccato, 
is given in Chapter XVII. I include Fig. 102 here, however, because 
it shows,, in a modified form, the typical vibrato ” tet^us that 
we have just been considering. This figure represents a series of 
staccato finger-strokes, passing from a moderate degree of staccato 
to the maximum staccatissimo stroke and back again to a moderate 
staccato. The recording was done with the recording level of Pig. 29. 
The arm of the lever rested across the tendon of the common finger 
extensor (extensor communis digitorum). A relaxation of the 
muscle of this tendon would result in a drop of the recording needle, 
a contraction of the muscle in a rise of the needle. As the degree of 
staccato increases, the drop in the needle decreases, until toward 
the middle of the figure it is only one-fourth of the original drop 
in the moderate staccato. The muscle controlling finger-lift, there- 
fore, in staccatissimo effects, remains contracted and does not relax 
but a little during the down-stroke. Such a coordination is based 



Em. 102. 


upon the gain in speed of reversal of motion which is the redeeming 
feature of the vibrato touches. The descent of the finger requires 
an additional force to overcome the resistance of the extensor 
contraction, but just as soon as this force is released, the extensor 
lifts the finger without a moment’s delay. Moreover, since with 
simultaneous contraction of antagonistic muscles the inertia of the 
moving part is decreased (see Fig. 99) the reversal of direction at 
the moment of finger-key impact is not delayed on account of 
finger-inertia. Needless to say, the early onset of fatigue functions 
for the finger-staccato as it does for the hand-staccato or vibrato. 

Movement-Phase, 

In all staccato touches the positive phase is the hand-release : 
the up-stroke. It is trae that in staccato, as in all touches, tone- 
production is the aim, but the staccato effect depends not primarily 
upon tone-production, but upon tone-cessation ; a quick get- 
away The attention, as usual, should be directed toward the 
positive phase, hence the up-stroke. Li this connection the staccato 



216 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

touclies are directly opposed to the legato touches, and the import- 
ance of directing the attention to the positive phases in both cannot 
be over-estimated : in staccato the up-stroke counts ; in legato, 
the down-stroke. 

Inertia. 

In discussing the question of weight-transfer in relaxation, the 
dependence of it upon arm-position was pointed out, and the 
conclusion reached (p. 130) that the forward position of the trunk 
was least efiective for weight touch. In vibrato the physiological 
conditions are reversed. Reduction of useless motion here is a 
necessary factor. By throwing the centre of mass of the arm very 
close to the vertical humerus, the inertia of the fore-arm movement 
is reduced to a minimum. This favours the rapid changes in the 
direction of the movement characteristic of the vibrato touch, and 
makes the adoption of a forward trunk-position not only advisable, 
but even necessary. In fact it is impossible to play an effective 
vibrato with the arm extended in front of the body. The pianist 
not only avoids this position, but leans further forward for the 
vibrato touches than normally. 



CHAPTER XVn 


Finger-Stbokk 

In any finger-stroke of piano technique the movement made by the 
tip of the finger is the determining element, since it is this point that 
comes into actual contact with the piano-key. The finger itself is 
a compound lever of three parts, the arrangement of which permits 
considerable range as to amplitude and direction. Consideration of 
several typical finger-strokes will help an understanding of the 
mechanical principles involved. A single finger-stroke is made 
possible by the fact that the flexor and extensor muscles have 
four separate tendons each, one for each finger, and the muscle can 
act as a whole, moving all :^gers simultaneously or in any combina- 
tion of parts. The (difficulty which the young beginner finds in 
separate articulation of the fingers residts from the fact that 
biologically, they are all controlled by one muscle, the coordinated 
subdivision of which has to be acquired through training. It is not 
physiologically a fundamental coordination and the capacity to 
acquire the disintegrated action varies widely among pupils, being 
one of the fundamental capacities of instrumental talent. 

Finger-strokes can difier in only two ways : in direction and in 
intensity. Variations in direction can take place in several planes, 
and may be separated from or combined with variations in intensity. 
Variations of either factor may, again, be of any degree, within the 
limits set by the physiological structure of the finger, hand, and 
arm. The classiflcation used in the following pages is concerned 
with the important typical forms of finger-stroke used in piano- 
playing, but many modifications are also at the command of the 
pianist. 

Angle of Mmcidm-Pidl, 

Before taking up the various finger-strokes, one variant, present 
to some extent in all finger-strokes, should be mentioned. This 
is the angle of pull of the finger muscles. When the finger is fully 
extended, the muscles controUing its descent pull almost parallel to 
the long axis, hence, at a minimal efficiency. As the finger descends, 
and changes its angle with the back of the hand, this angle of pull 

217 



218 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

also clianges and becomes more efficient as it approaches a right- 
angle. Fig. 103 diows these variations diagrammatically. The 
heavy lines represent the lines of muscular pull, the black segments, 
the angles of pull, a, 6, e, d, e the finger-joints, and a, a\ a'" various 
positions of the extended finger ; e-f the central part of the hand. 
With the finger at a, the line of pull d-/is parallel to the line of the 
hand ; at it pulls at a much better angle. 



103 . 


Flat-Finger Stroke. 

In this touch-form the fully extended finger moves in the hand- 
knuclde. No movement at either the middle or nail-joint takes 
place. The distance from the fulcrum to the point of resistance is 
the length of the extended finger : for an adult xhird-finger from three 
to four inches. The length of the vertical arc described by the tip 
of such a finger is approximately four inches. 

A descent of the finger results from contracting the muscles 
situated in the hand, the lumbricales and palmar interossei. The 
muscles that bend the two phalanges of the finger are not directly 
involved. The mechanism is thus a lever of the third class, with 
the force applied between the fulcrum and the resistance. A lever 
of this type is of advantage in transferring force into speed. The 
finger-tip gains in speed but loses in force. The value of the strai^t 
finger-stroke, accordingly, is not in the production of loud tones, 
but of soft tones. If loud tones are thus produced we work at a 
mechanical disadvantage. Moreover, since the flat-finger position 
brings the softest part of the “ finger cushion ” into contact with 



FINGER-STROKE 219 

the kej, the noise of finger-percussion is reduced to a minimum, 
which, as repeated experiment has shown, is particularly desirable 
in the production of “ singing ” tones. 

Conversely, if we wish to strengthen the finger muscles by practice, 
the flat-finger position will exercise them more than the curved- 
finger position, since they work at a mechanical disadvantage, 
each stroke requiring relatively more energy. The force of the 
descending finger is the product of its mass and its acceleration. 
Since it takes time to set any body into motion, the force with which 
the finger-tip reaches the key will be determined, in part, by the 
distance throng which it has moved. A high finger-stroke win 
produce a louder tone, other things equal, than a low finger-stroke. 
This relationship can, of course, be reversed by sufficient differences 
in the speed and force of muscular contraction, but in the present 
analysis, these are supposed to be constants. A high finger-stroke, 
however, is not adapted to speed of tonal succession since it takes 
more time to move the finger through four inches and back again, 
than through two inches. This effect of range on movement we 
have already discussed in Chapter XII. Accordingly, any 
passage demanding moderate intensity and great speed, if played 
with flat fingers, is being played at a decided mechanical disadvan- 
tage, and can be more easily and hence effectively played with 
curved fingers. The advantage of the flat-finger stroke, since its 
particular characteristics are lightness and minimal noise of 
percussion, is therefore in le^ero ” and soft cantabile ” passages. 

The mechanical effect of a constant muscular pull does not 
remain a constant. With the finger fully extended, the muscle 
pulls at a decidedly weak angle since it is pulling almost parallel 
to the line of the lever itself. As the finger descends, this line of 
action changes and increases in efficiency as it approaches a right 
angle with the line of the lever. It seems, therefore, inadvisable 
to oblige a child just learning a new coordination, to begin with an 
excessively high finger-stroke, thus forcing the muscles, the correct 
use of which is the object of the exercise, to work at the very . 
greatest mechanical disadvantage. It is, mechanically, very 
similar to developing muscular movement through rigidity — ^an 
obvious impossibility. The condition here referred to, is rather 
strikingly ^own in the case of pupils with so-called double- 
jointed ’’ hand-knuckles. If the fifth finger, in such an instance, 
be lifted and curved excessively, it is impossible to bring it down 
without some relaxation in the extensor muscle and then often 
only with a perceptible jerk as it passes a strai^t-angle. The 
condition in a normal hand, though less pronounced, is very similar. 



220 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

In the very extended position the muscle pushes the finger against 
the hand-knucMe, and the resulting increase in friction is pure 
mechanical waste, so far as the efiectiveness of the stroke is 
concerned. 

The path traversed by the tip of the finger in the flat-finger 
stroke is shown in Fig. 104a, and the variations in the angle of 
pull in Fig. 103. 

The Curved-Finger Stroke, 

The finger is curved in its three joints so that the nail-joint is 
held vertically. As the finger descends, flexion in the hand-knuckle 
increases (the same as in the flat-finger stroke) but decreases in the 
two inter-phalangeal joints. This coordination sends the tip of the 
finger through a straight, approximately vertical line. Distance 
from fulcrum to resistance is approximately two inches. In Fig. 
1046 the player’s hand was to the left of the figure. 



Fig. 104. 


This touch-form is the typical curved-finger touch of modem 
piano pedagogy. Its mechanical advantages may be inferred from 
the preceding analysis of the flat-finger stroke. Since the resistance 
is nearer the fulcrum, the effect of the force is proportionately 
greater. The increase in the noise of percussiveness resulting from 
the less advantageous part of the finger cushion actually in contact 
with the key-surface, is partly compensated for by the less amount 
of actual percussiveness needed to produce the desired quantity 
of tone. The normal adult curved finger can, if necessary, produce 
a tone of moderate intensity without any finger-lift from the 
key-surface. 

The physiological forces acting in the two types of finger-stroke 
are not equal. Since the actual tone-producing part of the finger 
in all finger-strokes is the finger-tip, the chief determinant of the 
force effect of the finger-stroke is the distance through which the 
tip of the finger moves. In a flat or straight finger the finger-tip 



221 


FINGER-STROKE 

in its descent will describe a longer arc than in a curved position, 
in which the length of the lever-arm is considerably reduced. The 
apparent advantage of the flat-finger, on account of its greater 
range, is counterbalanced by the disadvantageous position with 
regard to force. With the increase in speed goes a loss in force, 
because the energy is used up in producing spe^. It is a condition 




similar to that found when we attempt to push forward with the 
arm fully extended at the side, and again, with the arm sharply 
bent at the elbow, and held close to the body. The better leverage 
in the latter case is quite noticeable. This is the physiological 
expression of one of the laws of the lever stated in the chapter on 
Mechanical Principles. The relative minuteness of distances here 


222 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

involved affects the operation of this mechanical law only in the 
change of absolute values. The principle holds just the same. 

We may conclude, therefore, that flat fingers are conducive 
to speed in finger sequences, curved fingers to force. In a series of 
earlier experiments I have shown that, normally, we tend to play 
louder with a curved than with a flat finger, and the records in the 
preceding and succeeding chapters, dealing with that phase, all 
show a similar relationship. 

Physiological Contrast. 

But the physiological differences between the flat and the curved 
finger-strokes also involve considerable differences in muscular 
contraction. In order to lift the tip of the extended finger, let us 
say, two inches above the key, the finger extensors need be relatively 
slightly contracted. 

Then the angle which the dorsal surface of the finger makes with 
the back of the hand, when the hand is in the normally arched 
playing-position is, for many adult hands, approximately 200®. 



Etc. 106. 


In order to raise the finger-tip the same distance, with a fully curved 
finger (vertical nail-joint) the dorsal angle just mentioned becomes 
approximately 160®. A general illustration of this difference is 
shown iu Fig. 106 and can be the result only of additional contrac- 
tion of the finger extensors. It is not the result of the bending, 
because this is performed by the finger flexors which cannot raise 
the finger. The same result is obtained when we record the contrac- 
tion of the finger extensors, by attaching a sensitive recorder to 
the tendon as it crosses the back of the hand. In Fig. 106, I 
represents the degree of contraction of the tendon when the 
fib3ger-tip rests upon the key. The tendon here is at normal tension. 
The recorder was so adjusted that any contraction of the extensor 
muscle, which necessarily produced a “ tightening ” of the tendon, 
caused an upward deflection of the recordhig point. The finger was 
then lifted to a position of extension in line with the back of the 
hand, slightly higher than the position shown in Fig. 105a. This 
contraction is shown by the rise of the line in Fig. i06 to level n. 
The finger was then curved, nothing being said to the subject about 



PINGEE-STROKB 223 

lift. Instead, the instructions were merely to keep the finger 
ready for a descent. The added contraction of the muscle is 
revealed by the rise to level o, although the tip of the finger remained 
the same distance above the key. When the finger was returned 
to its extended, lifted position, the muscle returned to its position 
of partial contraction, shown by the drop in the line to level p, 
which corresponds to w. And when the finger finally descended 
to the key, the relaxation was complete and the point dropped 
to its original level L Accordingly, in order to lift the &iger 
preparatory to its stroke, considerably more muscular contraction 
is needed for a curved finger than for a straight finger, the tip of which 
is lifted through the same distance. 

Moreover, the distribution of muscular forces during the finger- 
descent differs for the two types of finger-position. *When the 
extended finger descends to the key, the angular relationship among 
the three phalanges themselves, does not change. The entire 
joint-action takes place in the hand-knucHe. When the curved- 
finger stroke is used, however, the finger straightens out 
somewhat as it descends. The touch thus combines a slight con- 
traction of the extensors of the second and third phalanges and a 
contraction of the flexors of the hand-knuckle, so that even during 
descent, there is a slight contraction of the muscles that lift the 
finger, resulting in so much opposition to finger-descent. The advan- 
tage of the curved finger-stroke is in the direction in which the 
finger finally reaches the key : vertical descent ; a gain not present 
in the flat-finger touch, in which, if the hand is in the usual arched 
position, the finger necessarily strikes the key a slanting blow. This 
difference in the direction of the force is shown by the arrows 
in Fig. 104c and is the type of finger-stroke recommended in the 
earlier works on piano technique as the typical light staccato 
touch. Lightness is a necessary result of this touch form since the 
vertical speed of the finger-tip is considerably reduced as the 
finger follows the curved line of the arrow. It is but natural, there- 
fore, that such a touch-form should be advocated for li^t staccato 
effects. The extension of the second and third phalanges is produced 
by two sets of muscles: the dorsal mterossei and lumbricales, 
situated in the hand ; and the extensor of the fingers, situated in 
the fore-arm. In the staccato touch just described, no extension 
at any finger-joint is present, so that the two types of finger-stroke 
are muscularly quite different. 

The opposition of the finger extensor to the flexor, present in the 
curved-finger stroke, makes this stroke less favourable for teaching 
the rudiments of relative finger isolation. The ease of finger-stroke 



224 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

is much more readily’ acquired with a flat-finger stroke, and, 
accordingly, the latter is recommended for the first exercises in 
finger-stroke. The undesirable breaking-in of the nail-joint is not 
a result of this finger-position, but of an incorrect coordination, 
as I have pointed out elsewhere (p. 225). 

Muscularly, finger-movement is (as all bodily movements are) 
not restricted to activity of the muscles directly controlling the 
part moved. The finger-stroke, under normal pianistic conditions, 
is fujcompanied by a quiet arm held in normal keyboard position, 
well arched hand, horizontal fore-arm at the level of the keys, and 
moderately abducted upper arm. 

The arm and hand-positions thus demanded, as we have seen in 
the discussion of arm-stroke, involve contraction of the shoulder 
muscles in order to abduct the upper arm, of the flexors of the 



Fig. 107. 


elbow, of the pronators of the fore-arm, and of the dorsal flexors 
of the wrist. The functions of these muscles are, respectively, to 
keep the arm from sinking against the side of the body, the elbow 
bent at the proper angle, the fore-arm in a position of horizontal 
pronation, and the hand in a position over the keys. 

As the feger-tip descends the flexors of the hand-knucMe contract, 
with the extensors of the two phalanges, thus keeping the nail- 
joint perpendicular and preventing the nail itself, instead of the 
fleshy part of the finger-tip, from striking the key. "When the finger 
meets the key the resistance would produce upward motion at the 
hand-knucHe. This is restricted by appropriate contraction of 
the dorsal wrist flexors. Fig. 107 shows how volar flexor contraction 
occurs in a full arm-drop. The force of key-resistance thus spends 
itself against the various fibred joints and these, in turn, enable 
ihe descending finger to depress the key with the desired force. 



MKGER-STROKE 22S 

Finally, some contraction of the flexors of the finger-joints is 
necessary to prevent the ‘‘ breaking-in ” of these joints, especially 
that of the nail-joint. 

The Nail-Joint. 

On account of the importance which the breaking-in of the 
nail-joint assumes among the problems of piano pedagogy, a more 
detailed treatment of this phase is advisable. 

In the first place, the normal breaking-in of the joint, as I have 
frequently mentioned in the case of other joints, is in no way an 
indication of v%akness in the joint itself. It is entirely a question 
of incorrect muscular contraction and relaxation of the muscles con- 
trolling the joint. And, contrary to popular belief, the so-called 
curved nail-joint position can be best tau^t from the flat-finger 
position, not from an exaggeration of the curved-finger position. 
The reason for this is not hard to find. In discussing the effect 
upon intensity of the spatial position of the various parts of the 
skeletal structure involved in the movement, I pointed out the 
tendency to shift the bones into a straight-line position so that 
the force would be opposed by a relatively solid bony structure. 
The bones, in such a case, relieve the muscles from the necessity, 
and possible injury, of doing excessive work. If the finger-tip be 
held vertical, its bone, the third phalanx, is forced end to end against 
that of the second phalanx, demanding very little, if any, contraction 
of the muscles. On the other hand, in the flat-finger position, the 
action of the key-resistance (vertically upward) is at ri^t angles to 
the line of pull of the flexors of this joint (flexor profundis digitorum) 
and hence the joint can be kept curved only by contraction of this 
muscle. (Fig. 103 showing the variations in the angle of puH for 
the first phalanx, may serve as an illustration of this principle, 
which is similar for the nail-joint.) 

Once the pupil realkes that it is a question of contraction of this 
muscle, the correction of the breakmg-in of the nail-joint follows 
in a very short time. The strength of muscles of children so young 
as four years is more than sufficient to overcome the resistance of 
the piano-key. The solution of the problem lies entirely in intro- 
ducing resistance to the contraction of the muscle and not in a 
mere curved position of the joint. The co5xdination is readily 
acquired by having the pupil place his finger flat upon a black key 
and then asking him to press firmly while at the same time the 
finger-tip slides along the key toward the hand. 

The device, used by some teachers, of insuring an excessive 
curvature of the nail-joint by lowering the wrist well below the 



226 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

keyboard level is better than the curved-fingCT position, but not 
entirely good. Unless care be taken to insure muscular contraction, 
the pressure of finger-tip against the key and the mere weight of 
the fore-axm, will suffice to bend out the nail-joint. The desired 
position of the joint is thus secured, but by an incorrect muscular 
adjustment. The same holds for the curved-finger stooke. In both 
instances skeletal or tendonous structure holds the joint in position, 
but the muscles responsible for the position as used in actual playing 
are largely inactive. Conse«juently, when the finger returns to a 
normal stroke, the breaking-in recurs. This argument about the 
position of the nail-joint is not of purely academic interest. For 
the position of this joint is physiologically the last joint controlling 
tie transmission of the muscular force to the piano-key. All other 
parts of the coSrdination may be correctly adjusted, but if the 
nail-joint “ breaks ”, it is not under control, and hence the desired 
tonal effect cannot be accurately and quicUy secured. 


AAAAAAAAAAAAAA/V/VWWWWWWWW\AAAAAAA/ 



Fig. 108 . 


The effect of the nail-joint position upon key-movement may be 
inferred from previous analyses of conditions at other joints. 
If the nail-joint breaks, the flexors of this joint are relaxed. Hence 
when the finger-tip meets the key-resistance the key will extend 
the finger-tip. It is this key-resistance that actually causes the 
break not any muscular activity. For the joint never breaks 
until key-resistance is met. The force, then, that should depress 
the key is being counteracted by the ascending force of key- 
resistance which in turn bends back the finger. “When this 
extension has reached its physiological limit, a point determined 
by the range of the tendon and the capsular ligament, the joint 
b^omes a rigid body and the key is depressed. The records of 
key-descent should, accordingly, show a slower speed when the 
nail-joint breaks than when it is held partly flexed by appropriate 
contraction of the deep flexor muscle. In Fig. 108, a shows the 
key-depression for a breaking ” nail-joint, 6 that for a curved 
nail-joint. The time-lme is, as usual, in fiftieths of seconds. By 
comparing the two curves we* find that in a key-depression took 



• FINGER-STROKE 227 

five-fiftieths of a second, whereas in 6 it only took two-fiftieths. 
The imaged tonal inteusity was the same; that is to say the 
velocity of the finger in these records was as nearly equal for both 
strokes as it is possible for the player to get it, 

Finger-PosHdon and Key~Resistance, 

The effect of key-resistance upon finger-stroke is likewise deter- 
mined in part by the position of the finger as a whole. When the 
key-movement itself is recorded it nomaally shows a slower descent 
for a flat-finger stroke than for a curved-finger stroke. (See also 
Fig. 108.) The reason for this difference is found in the leverage 
system used. In the straight-finger touch the length of the lever 
arm is almost twice that of the curved finger, as may be seen by 
comparing the distances in a and h of Fig. K®. In my own case 
the lever in the straight finger (index) is four inches ; curved two 



and one-half inches. Accordingly, since the forces of two positions 
are in inverse ratio to the length, of the lever arms, the flat-finger 
touch, other things equal, is approximately three-fifths as strong 
as the curved-finger touch. The fact that this ratio can readily 
be reversed through appropriate muscular contraction must not 
confuse the issue. The same amount of muscular energy will produce 
a louder tone with curved than with straight finger. Normally 
we play softer with flat than with curved fingers, and this relation- 
ship is altered only when additional muscular contraction is used. 

"V^en, therefore, key-resistance is introduced against the 
descending finger, its effect upon the flat finger will differ from that 
upon the curved finger. And the nature of this difference we can 
forecast in advance. Since the key-resistance is a constant for 
any one degree of tonal intensiiy, and the force of the flat finger 
is less than that of the curved finger, the flat finger will be retarded 



228 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

xnore tliaix the curved finger, when it strikes the key-surface, and 
if a greater part of the force of finger is taken up by the upward 
force of the key, that much less is left for key-depression. In Fig. 109 
the two types of finger-stroke are twice recorded, a in both sets 
is the curve for the flat-finger stroke, I that for the curved-finger 
stroke. The point of key-:^ger contact is marked by the arrows, 
and the angle formed at this point shows clearly that the flat 
finger is retarded more than the curved finger. In fact in a, in 
the second record, the finger is actually thrown up for an eighth 
of an inch before it resumes its descent. In the first set, although 
the initial speed of the flat finger (a) was slightly greater than that 
for the curved finger (6), shown by the greater steepness of a when 
compared to 6, the retardation is again more marked in the flat- 
fimger stroke. The difference of course in both time and intensity 
is slight, but just these minute differences are the basis upon which 
subtle effects of artistic shading so often depend. 

Moreover, the elimination of this retardation as far as possible, 
should be the aim of fibager-stroke pedagogy. Such retardation 
(shown by the complete cessation of descent in a of Fig. 109) 
Erectly affects the control of tonal intensity. The elimination is 
secured by appropriate muscular contraction at the moment of 
impact, the additional force serving to overcome the suddenly 
added key-resistance. The details of this coordination are dis- 
cussed in the various touch-forms yet to be considered. 

The Elliptical Stroke, 

In both types of stroke, thus far considered, the up-stroke is 
geometrically, but not physiologically, the exact reverse of the 
down-stroke, the finger-tip traversing the same arc or line in reverse 
direction. (See Fig. 104, a, 6.) Such a curve. Fig. 104 a, (see 
Geometries) is characteristic of movement at only one joint. A 
third type of stroke, met with in the older works on piano technique, 
is that in which the finger-tip is drawn in as it descends and the 
tone is made, and returns in a more flexed position of the finger-tip 
to its original starting point. The finger-tip actually describes an 
approximate ellipse or triangular path in this case, hence I have 
called the stroke elliptical. The motion is illustrated on a much 
larger scale by the pawing ” motion of a horse. Since the angle 
at which the finger-tip strikes the key-surface approaches a right 
angle, and the greatest force-effect is at a straight-angle, the 
elliptical stroke is useless for strength. Its value lies in the extreme 
lightness with which the key may be depressed, and the finer 
control of the piano and pianissimo degrees of tone. This control 



FINGEE-STEOKE 


229 


results from the greater distance through which the finger remains 
in contact with the key before the key reaches its key-bed. The 
actual distance of vertical key-movement remains the same of 
course, being approximately three-eighths of an inch. And when the 
finger descends vertically, its line of contact is likewise three-eighths 
of an inch. But when the finger-tip is pulled toward the hand as 
the key is depressed, its line of contact is considerably lengthened. 
Experiment has shown that within certain limits this increase is 
favourable to finer control of speed and resistance.^ 

In itself, that is to say, applied to a single finger, the elliptical 
stroke is not adapted to speed, since whatever the long diameter 
of the ellipse described, the circumference is longer than the straight 
line stroke of the same height, hence, other things equal, consumes 
more time. However, when fingers are changed there is one form 
of finger-pattern particularly suited to this touch : the rapidly 
repeated tone. The movement of the finger-tip used in this type 
of touch is shown in Fig. 104c in connection with the flat and curved 
finger-strokes 

A curious application of this touch-form to all forms of repeated 
tones, regardless of tempo, will be recalled by every experienced 
teacher. Yet, neither mechanically nor physiologically is a change 
of finger desirable when the rate of repetition is slow : Mozart’s 
D nainor Fantasia (measure 19), and Chopin’s B minor Prelude, 
right hand, are examples. 

Finger-Key Percussion 

On the physical side all variations in key-movement group them- 
selves into two classes : those produced by variations in key-speed 
and those produced by variations in the percussiveness. In the 
former, the key is set into motion by starting the descent of the 
finger at the key-surface ; in the latter, the key is struck a blow 
by the descending finger, which has already attained a considerable 
velocity when it reaches the key-surface. It is natural to suppose, 
then, that similar conspicuous differences exist in the physiological 
aspect of the finger-key percussion, for we have seen that the 
physiological response is determined directly by the mechanical 
demands of the movement. 

When a moving body meets a body at rest there is a mutual 
rebound, one from the other, the exact ratio depending upon the 
actual force and upon the masses of the two bodies. When the 

^ 0. Ortmann : “ Weight Discrimination as a measure of Technical Skill in 
Piano Playing,” Jl. Comp. Psych., vol. iii, No. 1. 



230 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

finger-tip strikes the key the latter is driven away for a brief part 
of its descent. Meanwhile the descent of the finger must in conse- 
quence be retarded, and for a moment the finger is not in actual 
contact with the key-surface. "When the shock of the percussion 
has been overcome, the finger “ catches up ” again with the key and 
depresses it to the key-bed. The dimensions of this discontinuity 
in finger and key-descent are so small, and the time required for 
the complete stroke is so short that neither the eye nor the touch- 
sense perceives them. Finger-movements, however, may be 
graphically recorded and fine variations in speed and direction 
shown. This enables us to study the nature of percussive-touch. 

Fig. 110 illustrates one method of recording these movements. 
The apparatus consists essentially of five non-flexible strips of 
aluminium attached at one end to five writing levers. By changing 
the points of attachment to the levers the movements may be 
magnified or reduced. The other ends of the writing levers touch 
the surface of a revolving drum. Its movement is horizontal 
while that of the levers is vertical. Hence speed variations will be 
measurable by the amount of deflection from the vertical. The 
lower end of the rods is attached to that part of the finger, the move- 
ment of which is to be recorded, care being taken to eliminate 
play ” in the point of attachment. The entire apparatus must 
be nicely adjusted so that no appreciable mechanical resistance is 
introduced. 

The direction relationships between fibnger-movement and drum 
record will be reversed in such an arrangement. In all the sub- 
sequent figures, however, in order to make the reading of them easier 
the direction has been re-reversed, so that the lines of the figures 
show the actual direction of finger-movement, a descending line 
representing a descending finger, and vice versa. No attempt 
has been made to keep the scale at 1 : 1 or at any other constant 
since the absolute distance traversed by the finger is of no importance 
for the conclusions here drawn. Wherever it does influence the 
result, the scale of reproduction accompanies the figure. 

In order further to facilitate the reading of the figures I append 
some typical curves with their legends. Each figure is to be read 
from left to right. 

a = quick beginmng and uniform speed. 

6 = slow beginning and gradual increase in speed of key-descent. 
c = great and uniform :toger-speed. 
d == slow and uniform finger-speed. 

e = increase in finger-speed half-way through stroke. Then a 
retardation, followed by a subsequent uniformly slower finger-speed. 



’-w 



Fig. no. Method of recording key-movements and vertical 
finger-movements. 


[To face p, 23a 




FINGEE-SmOKE 


231 


/ = increase in finger-speed ; then a momentary stoppage of 
ffnger-descent (shown by the short horizontal portion of the curve) ; 
then a subsequent increase in finger-speed to the bottom of its 
stroke. 



Percussive and Non-Percussive Touch, 

From a mechanical and physiological standpoint, the difference 
between these touch-forms may be described as the introduction 
of a sudden resistance during the course of finger-descent. In 
non-percussive touches, the key-resistance is present at the beginning 
of finger-movement ; in percussive touches the key-resistance 
is not met until the finger has begun and has passed through a part 
of its descent. The resistance of the key will slow down the finger, 
since a part of the force of the latter is utilized in setting the quiet 
key into motion. More force is required to do this rapidly than 
slowly. The upward action of the key and the downward action 
of the finger are opposite and equal forces, if allowance be made for 
the speed of and direction of key-movement. In the middle region 
of the piano, key-resistance varies from a minimum of approximately 
two and one-half oxmces in the treble, according to the place at 
which the key is depressed. If the force of the finger is greater 
than the resistance of the key, the latter wiU be depressed. If not, 
the finger -descent will be stopped and the key will remain unmoved. 
In aU finger-strokes we have seen that the immediate fulcrum is 
the hand-knucMe. Accordingly, this joint must be fixed sufficiently 
to withstand the key-resistance. Now the fixation of the hand- 
knucMe depends, in turn, upon the fixation of the hand itself, 



232 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

which demands contraction of the muscles controlling movement 
at the wrist. Only by fixing the wrist can the hand-knuckle be 
held firm. The moment movement occurs in the wrist, movement 
in the hand-knuckle follows if the finger-position is to be retained. 
Or, generally stated, the fixing of the position of any joint in which 
movement is to take place, demands tiie fixation of all other joints 
between it and the trunk sufficient to overcome the resistance. 
For very light finger-strokes, the weight of the hand, and through 
this, its inertia, may be sufficient to overcome the slight key- 
resistance, without appreciable fixation of the wrist-joint. But 
if a louder tone be desired, a fixed fulcrum from which the finger- 
stroke acts can be maintained only by sufficient contraction of 

c 


CL 



^Fia, 112 . 



AAAAAAAAAA, 



muscles controlling the wrist-joint, and for extreme degrees, 
even those of the elbow and shoulder. ^ 

The weight needed to produce a barely audible tone in the middle 
region of the piano keyboard varies between two and three ounces. 
For tones of moderate and extreme loudness a much greater force 
^ required. The significance of the key-resistance, in actual playing 
IS therefore much reduced. In fact, the inertia of the key is purposely 
kept small by the manufacturer so that its effect upon the finger- 
stoke may be minimal. A resistance of two ounces, against a force 
of several pounds affects it less relatively than the same resistance 
affects smaller forces. On the other hand, since the strength of 
the normal finger is limited, we may expect to find some retardation 



FINGEE-STROKE 


233 


in all percussive strokes restricted to finger-action. And this 
retardation, since it results from the percussion, will be absent 
in the records of non-percussive strokes. Fig. 112a shows finger- 
strokes with the piano-key fully depressed by outside mechanical 
means, before the stroke is made. The line descends unbrokenly, 
and in these records there is no increase of speed after the first 
third of the movement has been completed. The slight irregularity 
at the bottom of the curve results from the shock of finger and 
key-bed percussion. Fig. 1126 shows the finger-stroke for a non- 
percussive touch, but without the piano-key depressed in advance. 
Here, too, we find no irregularity during the finger-descent, since 
the resistance encountered by the finger is a constant factor. Fig. 
112c represents percussive touches, and shows clearly the retarda- 
tion in finger-descent at the point where the finger meets the key 
(indicated in the figure by the arrows). Moreover, the rest of the 
curves, after finger-key impact, since it deviates farther from the 
perpendicular than the parts before impact, shows slower speed. 
Therefore, the impact of the finger against the key results normally 
not only in a momentary immobility of the finger, but also in a slower 
descent afterwards. Several players, after making the records would 
not believe that the finger had been retarded. They then 
endeavoured in advance of the stroke to eliminate the retardation, 
but so long as a finger-stroke was used and the percussiveness was 
marked, lie retardation was present each time in spite of all 
attempts to eliminate it. 

In order to make sure that the particular method of recording 
did not influence any salient features of the curve, records of the 
percussive and the non-percussive finger-strokes were also naade 
with a standard form of Pantograph. This method is somewhat 
less refined than the other, but still the curves obtained, clearly 
show the retardation of the finger-descent which characterizes 
all percussive finger-strokes and its absence in the non-percussive 
touches. Records of the movements of the piano-key,^ moreover, 
agree entirely with these variations in finger-movement. 

Finally, there is a marked diSerence in the adjustment of forces 
in key-depression between a percussive and a non-percussive 
touch. In a percussive touch the original force can never be main- 
tained because the finger, through the principle of action and 
reaction, is retarded with the same force with which the key is 
accelerated. There is, accordingly, a loss in force, for the moment 
after impact, whereupon the finger reengages the key and uniform 


^ The Physical Basis of Piano Touch amA Tone, op. cit . 



23i TOUCH-FOBMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

or controlled pressure is used from tids point on. No such adjust- 
ment is present in non-percussive touches. 

The difference is seen in Fig. 113 in which a represents a non- 
percussive, pressure touch, &, a percussive touch. A rise in the line 
indicates an increase in force, a drop indicates a decrease ; a 
horizontal displacement indicates a maintaining of a constant 
force. In the percussive touch there is the initial noaximum, then 
a momentary loss, then a unif orm force. In a the force is steadily 
gained, and there is no subsequent loss. 






Fio. 113. 

Effect of Intensity on Finger-Strohe, 

Force is represented by the product of the mass and the accelera- 
tion. The former, for any one finger is a constant, the latter, a 
variable. The value of the acceleration at any point is determined 
by the degree of positive or negative acceleration and by the 
initial velocity. In a finger-stroke, starting from a point of rest, 
the final acceleration at the tone-producing point (the point of 
escapement) is determined by the speed with which the resting 
finger can be brought into motion. This consumes time, even 
though the amount be very small. Consequently, by starting the 
finger sooner, we gain time before it reaches the escapement point. 
But if at the same time the distance through which the finger-tip 
moves remains the mere one-quarter inch of key-descent we lose 
force proportionately, since a slower beginning with equal accelera- 
tion '^l show less final speed. In order, therefore, to make the 
increase in time of finger-movem^t (includiag ascent) serviceable 
for most degrees of tone-production, the distance through which 
the finger moves must be increased. That is to say, it the finger 
rests upon the key-surface, and a tone oi forte character be desired, 



FINGEE-STEOKE 


236 


using primarily a finger-stroke, tke finger will have to be jerked 
back from the key-surface, in order to permit a range of descent 
sufficient for gaining the necessary speed. 

Fig. 114 shows that this actuaUy occurs in such finger-strokes. 
a=pp\b~p: c = mp; eand/=J^. In the softer 

dynamic degrees this tendency to lift before the stroke is either 
absent entirely, or present to a small degree only, since the necessary 
speed of finger-stroke can be attained in the vertical distance 
shown. As the dynamic degree is increased the preliminary extensor- 
thrust increases in proportion, so as to give a greater range of 
finger-motion before the piano-key is reached. 



Fio, 114. 


Finger-Lift 

It is this extensor-thrust probably, that has been responsible 
for the adoption of “ lifted ” finger pedagogy. But, unfortxmately, 
I believe, a necessary distinction between its value for loud tones 
and its uselessness for soft tones is not always made. Lifted fingers 
are often insisted upon regardless of the degree of tone-value. 
The records here shown fail to reveal any trace of this lift when 
recorded under actual playing conditions for the softer dynamic 
degrees. The playing was done by experienced pianists unfamiliar 
with the purpose of the recording. Nor can any need for it be shown 
on mechanical principles. The excessive, oir even any high finger- 
lift for the production of soft tones is, therefore, clearly a waste 
of energy. 

In this connection it is interesting to watch the playing of any 
concert pianist at close range. The unused fingers are held — ^not 
inches, or even half-inches away from the keys — but almost touching 
them, leaving just space enough not to move the undesired keys. 
The narrow spaces by which the hand and fingers escape touching 
these shows the extreme nicety of well-coordinated movements. 

But the effect of a constant high finger-lift carries over also 
into the wrist, because extreme finger-extension is linked with 



236 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

dorsal flexion of tlie mist. That is to say, with the drawing back 
maximally of the fingers, goes a tendency to bend back the hand 
at the wrist. (Seep. 43.) But such a bending-back is undesirable 
for hand-position and the subsequent descent of the finger. 
Accordingly, the volar flexors of the mist are contracted in order 
to overcome this movement at the mist. The result is a fixing of 
the wrist to a degree of rigidity out of all proportion to the tone- 
value to be secured. This stiffening of the mist is characteristic 
of piano pupils at the beginning of instruction when extreme finger- 
extension is insisted upon. The spread of tension, however, is not 
to be considered an incoordinated response with the blame resting on 
the pupil. Quite the contrary. Excessive contraction of the exten- 
sors of the fingers is normally demanded only to overcome great 
resistance, such as in lifting a considerable weight hanging from the 
finger-tips. But if the fingers are to lift this weight there must 
be a fulcrum from which they can act. This fulcrum is the hand- 
knuckle, the position of which is fibsed by the simultaneous con- 
traction of the flexors and extensors of the wrist. Without this 
fixation the weight could not be lifted by the fingers. When, in 
piano practice, the fingers are lifted excessively the capsular 
ligament, tendonous extension and the fleshy parts around the 
joint combine greatly to increase the normal resistance, and the 
neural organism, being faced by such a condition contracts the 
necessary other muscles in order to overcome the resistance. It is a 
mechanical necessity that it does so. To insist upon extreme 
fibager-lift and at the same time a relaxation of the wrist-controlling 
muscles is contrary to both the physiological and the mechanical 
principles involved and is a coordination extremely difiSoult, when 
not impossible, for the beginner to acquire. 

Extreme finger-lift, therefore, if it reaches pressure against 
the restraining ligaments and tissues, involves a fixation of other 
joints, noticeably the wrist. It follows that, if relaxed movement 
be the pedagogical desideratum, the pupil should avoid extreme 
finger-lift. This is but another illustration of the principle that 
relaxation and extreme range of movement are physiologically and 
mechanically opposed. Movement is most free when the joints 
involved move near the middle-of their ranges. 

Spread of Tension, 

The effect of intensity on finger-lift has already been mentioned 
and the correlation between high finger-lift and loud tone pointed 
out. The spread of tension into the wrist occurs with finger-descent 
also since, here too, the excessive finger-lift is used as a means for 



FINGER-STROKE 


237 


securing greater finger-momentum — tence louder tone. And its 
effect upon relaxation is likewise tke same. So that, in the early 
stages of instruction, where relaxed movement is the problem, tones 
of minimal or at most moderate intensity should be called for, 
and the forte and fortissimo degrees avoided. As a matter of fact 
the stiffness for these extreme degrees never vanishes, at any time 
of study. We simply cannot play loudly and be relaxed to any 
extent. The mature artist still needs rigidity suJficient to balance 
the force necessary for production of the desired tone, and if to the 
casual observer the condition appears to be one of relaxation, this 
is because the experienced player, when there is no need for further 
tension, relaxes immediately after tone-production. (See Fig. 38 
in the chapter on Coordination.) The time interval is but a very 
small fraction of a second and readily escapes detection. The 
inexperienced pupil, on the other hand, often initiates the stiffness 
too soon and retains it after tone-production, at which points it 
has no value. (See Fig. 41.) 

Since the spread of tension, which for the purposes here described 
may be considered stiffness, varies directly with intensity, the 
least intensity will be accompanied by the greatest relaxation, 
and may be used in teaching relaxation. In fact, my own experience 
has been that, by avoiding key-pressure entirely, merely lifting the 
finger from, and dropping it to the undepressed key, the so-caUed 
isolation of finger-stroke, with its resulting relaxed wrist and arm, 
is more readily acquired than by demanding tone-production, with 
its necessary muscular resistance. 

We find, then, that for all finger-strokes beyond the soft degrees, 
some muscular fixation of the wrist is necessary. For the loud 
degrees, this fixation is accompanied by elbow fixation as well. 
The spread of tension is a necessary mechanical adjustment, without 
which the fiuger-tip could not properly act upon the key. 

Similar conditions hold for the various finger-joints. The finger 
as a compound lever, can transmit force through its tip only to the 
extent that each of its joints is 'fixed. Any give ” in any of its 
joints, beyond that balancing the force desiced at the finger-tip 
destroys the efficiency of the lever. (See paragraph on The Nad- 
Joint.) So the fixation spoken of, applies as well to the finger- 
joints as to the wrist and elbow. The structure of the finger-, 
joints and their relative positions makes the spread of tension less 
noticeable here than in the larger joints. 

Isolation. 

AH this points to the fact that isolation applies only to the 
appearance of a movement and not to its physiological nature, 



238 TOUCH-FOKMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

a fact that should cause us to hesitate is diagnosing pupils’ muscula 
coordination, as is universally done, from the mere appearance 
the visible changes during the movement. That physiologies 
isolation cannot exist from a mechanical standpoint I have already 
pointed out in the discussion of levers and mechanical principles 

Tf 


// 

Fig. 116 . 

That it does not exist, physiologically, may be seen in Fig. Hi 
which represents movement in the upper arm, near the shoulder 
for various degrees of intensity in finger-stroke. Beginning with th< 
pianissimo stroke no movement was recorded in the upper arm. 1 


v_/ 

Fig. 116 . 

slight increase in intensity, however, already shows a reaction o; 
the impact in the upper arm. This is more and more noticeabh 
as the intensity increases, an increase represented in the figure 
by reading from the top down, six degrees being represented 
l5ie record was made by a professional pianist possessing a so-callec 


Sfirtg&r 




FINGER-STROKE 


239 


“ finger-isolation All that is needed to show the non-isolated 
character of physiological movement is a sufficiently sensitive 
recording device. I am not splitting hairs here, hut merely pointing 
out the fact that isolation is related inversely to intensity. 

Fig. 116 shows the effect of a stroke of the second finger upon the 
position of the third finger. The former cannot move without 
imparting some of its movement, through flesh and tissue contact, 
to the adjoining, third finger, the fluctuations in the top line 
correspon^g, in point of time, exactly to those of the lower line. 
In order to avoid this “ sympathetic ” movement, pupils are often 
taught, or naturally adopt, a very fixed hand-position, in which 
the rigidity of the joints will eliminate the spread of movement. 
I am not prepared to say just to what extent such practice is 
necessary, but I believe it is much overdone. At any rate, we must 
remember that such fixation, since it is not mechanically necessary 
for the amoimt of tone produced at the finger-tip, is, according 
to the definition here adopted, an incoordinated movement, and 
as such is normally to be avoided. Nor do pianists in actual playing 
eliminate these sympathetic movements. 

Effect of Playing-Unit upon Fing^-Stroke. 

An indirect effect of intensity upon finger-stroke is reflected in 
the variations in the mass of the playing-unit. A finger-stroke may 
be used with a quiet arm, it may be accompanied by a hand- 
movement, a fore-arm movement, or a whole-arm movement. 
Each, of course, demands its own muscular adjustment. As we 
pass from finger-movement to arm-movement we increase the mass 
of the playing-unit, and, if we assume the velocity of the finger 
to remain constant, we increase the force of the playing-unit. Con- 
sequently, when the finger meets the key-resistance its descent 
wiU be interfered with in inverse ratio to the force behind the 
finger. The finger alone will be considerably retarded, the fore-arm 
somewhat, the whole-arm little. In experimenting with these 
variations one must be careful to insure the action of the desired 
unit : whole-arm, fore-arm, hand, or finger. Otherwise the results 
will be misleading. 

In Fig. 117 are shown the effects of variation in the retardation 
of the finger-stroke resulting from changes in the playing-unit. 
In a the finger was the playing-unit ; in 6 the hand ; in c the fore-arm 
with some addition of the upper arm ; and in d the entire arm. The 
last named forced a type of arm-movement scarcely practicable 
in normal piano-playing. I feel, therefore, that the usual arm- 
weight toudi will produce a curve closely approximating c rather 



240 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

than d. Since the elimination of the break in the descending line 
(indicated in a and 5 by the arrows), parallels the change in the 
mass, the weight of the playing-imit is shown to be one determinant 
of the retardation of the finger-stroke when key-resistance is met. 
But in discussing dynamics of movement, avoidance of all shock, 
and continuity of movement were mentioned as the most essential 




A/VVVVVVVV 




features of controlled movement. For maximal key-control, there- 
fore, the use of the arm is to be preferred to that of the finger, at 
least in the early stages of instruction. Of course, other elements 
frequently make the application of this principle impossible. 
Thus speed may make finger-action alone imperative, excluding 
all arm-movement. I have already touched upon the high degree 
of key-control possible in slow arm-movement, in discussing 



FINGEE-STROKE 241 

arm-legato. Here the added advantage of eliminating finger 
retardation and thus transmitting the force without loss to the 
key is shown. The problem, of course, is correlated inseparably 
with that of percnssiveness ; but ignoring the effect of all other 
factors, the illustrations show that the degree of fibager-retardation, 
and hence of tone-control, is determined in part by the mass of 
the playing-unit. 

Finally, in order to make sure that the records of the finger- 
stroke were being determined by key-resistance and not by other 
factors, numerous records were made in which key-movement 
and finger-movement were simultaneously traced. This was done 
by attaching a lever to the key played, in addition to the lever 
attached to the player’s finger. A typical record is given in Fig. 118. 
Between the points a and h the finger descends through the greater 
part of its stroke, before touching the key. The latter, of course, 
remains at rest, as the line ah of the key-tracing shows. Between 
6 and c, both finger and key descend. The greater distance of 



Fig. 118. 


descent for the key is explained by the fact that the finger-lever 
was attached behind the first inter-phalangeal joint, the excursion 
of which is naturally less than that of the finger-tip, which is further 
removed from the fulcrum of the movement. But the exact agree- 
ment in point of time between key-movement and finger-movement, 
the beginning of key-descent coinciding exactly with the retarda- 
tion of finger-descent and the end of key-descent with the end of 
finger-descent, shows clearly that the records which we have been 
studying are a safe picture of finger-movement as affected by key- 
resistance. Moreover, the initial jerk in the key-record of this figure, 
shows nicely the momentary stoppage of key-descent just after 
percussion. This point is the short horizontal distance, approxi- 
mately one seventy-fifth of a second. 

Relcmniion and Rigidity. 

Previous study of the mechanics of relaxation and rigidity revealed 
the close correlation of relaxation with relative softness and of 
rigidity with relative loudness of tone. The physiological reasons 


242 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

for this perfectly natoral relationship have already been given 
in the chapters on Eelaxation and Coordination. It wiU be helpful, 
however, to note the effect of these muscular conditions upon finger- 
stroke. In this case relaxation should normally result in a slower 
finger-stroke than rigidity, for upon finger-speed depends the tonal 
intensity. In making the records here given, the players were 
always asked to keep the intensity of the tone as nearly constant 
as possible. Needless to say this was not always done, since the 


relaxed 


VVXAAAAAAAAAA^' 





Fig. 119. 

difference in muscular coordination robbed the player of a very 
valuable help in determining dynamic equality. This help is equality 
in the muscular adjustment itself. To strike equal blows with the 
Snger and then with the arm is much more difficult than to strike 
bwo equal finger-blows or two equal arm-blows. The difference 
between relaxation and rigidity is just as great. A relaxed arm 
is naturally associated with weak force since it is mechanically 
mpossible to produce a great force with a relaxed arm. And 



FINGER-STROKE 243 

rigidity is just as closely associated witli great force. In fact tlie 
scale of tonal intensity on the piano is largely paralleled by a 
similar scale of rigidity in the player. To ask a player to produce 
tones of equal intensity with extreme variations in relaxation 
and rigidity is to ask for incoordinated movement. It is, therefore, 
not surprising to learn, even when the players considered the move- 
ments equal, that in each instance the fiii^er-movement made with 
rigidity was more rapid, hence productive of a louder tone, than 
when the movement was made with relaxation. Two pairs of 
records which serve to illustrate this difference are shown in 
Fig. 119. They have been selected from many, some of which show 
less and others noticeably more difference. The direction of this 
difference, however, never varied. The difference in fractions of 
a second may readily be calculated from the time-lines given, 
a, in the second group is the finger-movement for relaxation ; 
&, for rigidity. Care must be taken, in making such records, that 
the other determinants of tonal intensity : finger-position, amplitude 
of stroke, and playing-unit are kept constant. 

Tone-Qucdities. 

One of the most interesting questions, from the musician’s 
standpoint perhaps the most interesting of all, is the effect of 
finger-stroke upon tone-quality. However fanciful our conception 
of the artistic phases of piano touch may be, whatever poetic 
qualities we assign to the piano tone, the fact remains that percussion 
and intensity are the only determinants. This may be proved 
readily at any time by anyone taking the trouble to set up the 
necessary recording apparatus. 

AH differences in tonal qualities, therefore, must show in the 
degree of percussiveness and in the velocity of the finger-stroke. 
The method here used in investigating these qualities was to permit 
the player to produce whatever tone-quality he desired. The finger- 
lever attachment then recorded the movement of the finger. Two 
serious restrictions are thus imposed: movements of any part 
of the arm other than of the finger are not recorded and variations 
in the finger-position itself are lost in the record. An extensive 
analysis of the many qualities that have been assigned to piano 
touch and tone consequently becomes impossible by this method. 
But, on the other hand, the extent to which even a partial recording 
serves to reveal the dynamic principle at the bottom of aU tone- 
production on the piano, is sufficient to permit perfectly safe 
generalizations. 



244 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

Let xis take, for example, tie typical “ cantabile ” toTich, a t3^e 
of tone-production used in slow, sustained melodies of moderate 
intensity. If tbe analysis of tbe pbysical properties of piano touch 
and tone is correct, as a result of which a desirable tone-quaUty 
for such a melody is known to be one of little percussiveness and 
moderate intensity, there should be but little retardation in the 
descent of the finger. A ** surface ’’ quality of tone, as a contrast, 
is known by experiment to contain a larger degree of noise (per- 
cussiveness),and less tonal intensity. In Fig. 120 are seen the curves 
of finger-descent for both types of tone, a being that for the canta- 
bile, ** singing ” tone ; 6 that for a surface or depthless ” 
tone, a tone lacking in musical quality. Comparison with the 
curves of Fig. 1126, which show the finger-descent when the finger- 
tip rests upon or very close to the key-surface at the beginning of 
the stroke, shows that the cantabile touch is one entirely free from 


1 I 



A/VXAA/VWX/ 

b 



Fig. 120. 

percussiveness, since the retardation in finger-descent is entirely 
absent. In the surface quality of tone, however, shown at 6 
Fig. 120, we note a decided retardation (the point is marked 
by an arrow) as a result of which, in spite of a more rapid beginning 
of finger-descent, the finger, at the moment of hammer-escapement, 
is travelling at a slightly slower speed than in the cantabile touch. 
This is seen by the slope of the lines close to the right-hand vertical 
dashes. The degree of this difference is too small to be significant, 
but the fact that the greater initial speed in 6 has been entirely 
neutralized by key-impact is important. In a no force whatever is 
lost in finger-key impact, and no noise of this impact is present. 
In h the noise is noticeably present and the tone-value is a bit less, 
or at least is no more than in a. 

In Fig. 121 are seen the curves for a “ good, singing ” tone a, 
and a “dry”, musically uninteresting tone, 6. The markedly 
steeper curve for a means greater velocity of finger, hence, greater 



FINGER-STKOKE 


245 


key-speed and in turn, a louder tone. 6 stows very slow finger-speed 
wMch is brougtt to zero for two-fiftietts of a second at tte moment 
of finger-key impact. Again tte desirable tone quality is a tone of 
moderate intensity and but little percussiveness, the latter feature 
being reflected .in the momentary retardation at the middle of 


a 


\/\/\AAArKAJ\/\r^ 

b 



IhG. 121 . 


descent in a. Since the bottom half of this slope slants almost 
exactly as the top half, the finger has regained its full velocity 
before the key-bed or even the escapement-point has been reached. 
This is not so in 6 for the part of the curve after the point of finger- 
key impact (the line to the right of the arrow) is almost horizontal, 





whereas the part preceding this point slants. But at the rate at 
which the finger is moving in this touch-form the tone-production 
depends upon the part of the curve after finger-key impact. The 
difference between the slope of this line and the slope of the similar 
part in a is the measure of the difference in the intensities of the 



246 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

two tones. A dry tone is thus a tone of percussiveness and very 
Ktfele tonal intensity. 

Still another pair of tonal qualities are shown in Fig. 122. 
a, a shallow ’’ tone of good musical quality, 6, a “ full, round ” tone. 
I add the record of key-movement here to show the admixture of 
arm-movement in the tone of good quality. In b the initial descent 
of the curve (finger-line) to the left of the arrow, and the continua- 
tion of the direction, afterwards, with scarcely a fluctuation at the 
point of finger-key impact (arrow), and its further descent, even after 
the key has reached its key-bed (the distance is marked c to d), show 
the elimination of finger-retardation by the addition of arm- 
weight and movement. The curve approaches in contour those in 
Fig, 117c and d, in which the arm was the playing-unit. The shallow 
tone, on the other hand, shows a decided percussiveness (the point 
marked with an arrow in a) and a subsequent noticeably slower 
finger-speed. As a result, in spite of a much greater initial speed 
(compare the left-hand parts of the descents as to slope) the finger, 
in the “ shallow ” tone reaches the point of escapement at less 
speed than in the full tone. Here again, then, the desirable tone- 
quality was secured by reducing percussiveness and its resulting 
retardation in finger-movement to a minimum and keeping a 
sufficient speed for the production of a tone of moderate intensity. 
The undesirable sound-quality resulted from an xmdue percussive- 
ness (the auditory resultant of which is noise) and a minimum of 
tonal value. The break in the actual key-movement, characteristic 
of all percussive touches, may be seen in the short plateau at the 
beginning of the descent. 

The use of such terms as “ dry ” and shallow ” may seem far- 
fetched. However, every player, and certainly every teacher has 
his or her own adjectives which are applied to piano tone, often 
very aptly. On the other hand, since the meaning may not be clear 
to all, I have classffied the qualities into desirable and undesirable 
as well. 

The list could be advantageously extended. In many additional 
records made, none of them disclosed any deviation from the 
conclusions set forth in the preceding paragraphs. Moreover, the 
results are in entire agreement wiQi records of key-movement 
made under similar experimental conditions, and they also bear 
out the conclusions reached in the chapter on Tone-Qualities, as to 
the physical basis of tone-qualities. 

Repeated Tones. 

The adaptation of finger-stroke to the particular character of the 
technical passage is illustrated in the case of tone-repetition, the 



FINGEE-STEOKE 247 

type found for example, in study seven of the Cherny School of 
Finger Dexterity. The reason for using various fingers for rapidly 
repeated tones logically follows the analysis made in the preceding 
pages. By using 4, 3, 2, 1, instead of any single finger four times, 
we eliminate entirely the need for rapid fi:^er-repetition ; the 
sequence of tones is rapid but since each finger participates but 
once for every four tones, the rate of finger-repetition is relatively 
slow. Moreover, the moment one finger-tip leaves the hey the next 
is ready to depress it again. No time is lost in bringing the first 
finger to a stop and reversing its direction. Accordingly, the value 
of the changing fingers is in the gain of speed, and for very rapid 
repetitions, particularly when long sustained, it is the only way 
in which to avoid premature fatigue. In the discussion of staccato 
octaves, this fatigue and the means of retarding its onset are treated 
in detail. Because the change of finger is particularly good, even 
necessary, for maximum speed of tone-repetition, we Siould not 
conclude, however, that the change is good for slow repetition. 
All editors, it seems, advocate the change, regardless of tempo. 
The repeated single notes in such compositions as the D minor 
Fantasia of Mozart, or the D flat Prelude of Chopin, are marked, 
in all editions I have seen, with change of finger. This is not only 
unnecessary, but, for inexperienced hands, less conducive to fine 
tone-control than the repetition of the finger. A study of the 
effect of a change of finger on weight-discrimination ^ has shown 
that the discrimination is finest and most accurate when both 
movements are made with precisely the same parts. That is to 
say, with as little change in the coordination as possible. Pupils will 
play such slow repetitions with a much nicer control of dynamic 
values if they use a single finger instead of a change in fingers 
for all the repetitions. Only, as pointed out elsewhere, when the 
tempo reaches a point at which the repetition begins to set up a 
vibrato fixation, does the necessity for finger-change arise. 

Wrist-Position, 

Apart from its effect upon the direction of the finger-stroke, the 
position of the wrist also affects the intensity of the stroke. The 
inability forcefully to flex the fingers with the hand flexed volarly 
at the wrist is equivalent to saying that the intensity of the finger- 
stroke is impaired if the wrist is held high. Any coordination 
demanding simultaneous contraction of antagonistic muscles (see 
the analysis of the curved-finger stroke in this chapter) exerts an 
additional force against the joint, and this force, acting in a direction 
^ WeigM Bisorimijiation a measure of technical skill, op. dt. 



248 TOUCH-FOEMS OP PIANO TECHNIQUE 

usually at rigEt angles to tlat for wliicli the movement is intended, 
detracts from the effect of the latter force. Simultaneous contrac- 
tion of extensors and flexors are present in the curved-finger stroke. 
The higher the wrist the greater will be the pull of the finger- 
extensors, when the finger-tip is lifted, hence the greater will be 
the interference with the downward acting force of the flexors. 
Moreover, the angle of pull of the flexors is much better when the 
wrist is low than when it is high. (See Pig. 103.) 

Tem'po and Finger-StroJce, 

In the chapter on Lateral Arm-Movement, variations in tempo 
diowed a characteristic change in the nature of the curve of move- 
ment. In slow tempi the arm was not lifted in a continuous arc, 
as in the rapid tempi, but was transferred at low level with a 
subsequent rise as preparation of the second down-stroke. (See 
Pigs. 65 and 66 as examples.) The reason given was physiological 
economy. We should logically, therefore, expect to find a similar 



condition in finger-movement. When the rate of finger-movements 
is very slow, it is physiologically wasteful to carry the finger in a 
high Hfted position between strokes. A lift sufficient to permit 
the piano-key to ascend and thus stop tone, is all that is needed. 
Such a lift would stiU leave the finger-tip resting lightly upon, or 
held very closely to, the key-surface. Just before the following 
stroke, the finger would be lifted to the full extent desired, descending 
immediately for its next tone-production. In Kg. 123 typical 
instances of the two types of finger-stroke are given. In the curve 
for slow tempo the finger lifts slightly from a to &, just enough to 
allow the piano-key to ascend freely. The finger is then poised 
for a moment or two slightly above key-level, from h to c, and just 
before the second stroke, it is lifted to the full stroke height, from 
c to d. "When the tempo is rapid the lift from the key to the full 
height, a to d, takes place at once, and the preliminary resting at 
a partial lift (6 to c in the slow tempo) is absent, Eeference to the 



FINGER-STEOKE 


249 


figures illustrating the effect of tempo on lateral arm-transfer 
in Chapter XIII, show precisely the same difference in the type of 
movement. We may assume therefore, that we are dealing with a 
physiological condition characteristic of movement in general, 
so far as it is affected by variations in the rate of repetition. 

The question now suggests itself: should the high finger-lift 
be demanded in teaching, even at slow tempi ? The answer depends 
in part upon various psychological factors, hence it can only be 
touched upon here. It seems that if the aim of the exercise be speed, 
an immediate finger-lift (but not excessively high) and descent 
are desirable even in slow practice. But if the problem be the 
development of a free finger-stroke, the high-lift mamtained 
throughout the interval between the strokes is a hindrance, and, as 
such, is to be avoided. At any rate, in actual playing, the unused 
fingers are carried close to the keys and not in a highly lifted 
position. 

Mechmics of the Arched-Hand, 

The various types of finger-stroke which we have been considering 
cannot well be dissociated from the position of the hand itself, 
because this position in turn determines the position of the fulcrum 
at which the finger-stroke pivots. Modem pedagogy, practically 
without exception, has adopted the arched-band position shown 
in Fig. 166 and has given up the flat position of Fig. 16a. I have 
already pointed out some of the physiological advantages of the 
arched-hand, such as the shifting of normal finger-movement into 
the mid-range of action. And there is also a mechanical advantage. 
In the flat hand the muscles are pulling at the least effective angle, 
shown in Fig. 103 by the approximate parallelism between the 
top light line, representing the bone axes, and the heavy line 
representing the muscular pull. In the arched-hand, as the similar 
lines in Fig. 103 show, this angle has been considerably changed, 
the muscles now acting at a decidedly greater mechanical advantage. 
The onset of fatigue is known to be, in part, dependent upon the 
mechanical efficiency of the leverage system employed. The use 
of an excessively flat hand-position in order to strengthen the 
finger flexors by making them work in the least efficient position 
is not to be recommended. Such a position, if the practice is to do 
any good whatever, must be maintained by a contraction of the 
finger extensors, this contraction furnishing the necessary added 
resistance which the flexors must overcome. The result is a hyper- 
tension at the hand-knuckle, a typical incoordination which 
piano technique strives to overcome. Moreover, when the finger 



250 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

flexors liave additional resistance to overcome in normal movement, 
their increased contraction is never accompanied by an increased 
contraction of the extensors also, but rather by an increased relaxa- 
tion. The physiological conditions, therefore, are quite different. 
If additional resistance be desired for the strengthening of the 
muscles, this can be secured by appropriate weighting of the keys 
or by some form of finger exercise with appropriate apparatus, 
thus approximating the mechanical conditions actually found in 
playing. 



CHAPTEE XVni 


SciLliES 

An important part of finger-work on the piano is concerned with 
diatonic and chromatic progressions. T^ical instances of such 
technique are found in the scales. Not merely the formal complete 
scales, but any diatonic or chromatic passage demanding a shift 
of the hand from the first five-finger position. The only muscular 
difference between a scale and a five-finger passage is in the passing- 
under of the thumb (for ascending figures ri^t-hand , and desceuding 
figures left-hand) and the passing-over of the hand (for reverse 
directions). Our analysis, therefore, will be concerned primarily 
with these two phases of the movement, the physiological mechanics 
of the simple finger-stroke having been discussed in Chapter XVII. 

Li the chapter on weight-technique the impossibility of trans- 
ferring weight, when any rapid repetition of fingCT-stroke is involved, 
was pointed out. In an ascending scale, right-hand, the lift of 
the third finger, whai the thumb plays, is necessary in order to 
permit the second finger to play immediately after the thumb. 
This lift is necessarily accompanied by a lateral shift, without 
which the fingers cordd not be brought over their proper keys. 
The ascent of the filler is thus accompanied by a rolling of the 
thumb on its longitudiial axis, plus movement in its joints, which 
shift the hand over the thumb, the position of this digit being fixed 
by contact with the piano-key. Since finger-lift and hand-shift 
occur at the same time the third finger itself will describe an approxi- 
mately straight line ascending to the ri^t. Th^eupon it will 
descend approximatdy vertically upon the key, for its next stroke, 
after which the curve will be repeated. 

In a descending scale, the third finger plays immediatdy after 
the thumb at one point, and after the fourth finger at the other 
point. The he^ht at which the hand may be held over the key- 
board, by supporting it on the thumb-tip is much greatar when the 
thumb is in normal flexion at the side of the hand, than when it is 
flexed under the hand. Cionsequently, in an ascending scale, the 
greatest he^ht will be toward the end of the lateral hand-shift, 
whereas, in the descending scale it will be near the beginning of the 
shift. This highest point, however, is influenced further by the 

251 



252 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIAIJO TECHNIQUE 

shift itself, which takes place while the hand is lifted over the 
thumb. The highest point of the curve will, as a result, be shifted 
toward the centre of the curve in a descending scale. 

By attaching a source of light to the first phalanx of the third 
finger, so that the light stands immediately behind the second 
finger-joint, the movements of this joint in scale passages may be 
photographed. The typical curve resulting from this procedure 
is illustrated in Fig. 124. 

In this fi.gure the position of the observer is one facing the player 
as he sits at the keyboard, with the eye near the lev-el of the 
keyboard. The observer is thus looking across the keyboard at 
the hand. The curve a shows the movement of the third finger in 
an ascending C major scale ; the curve 6, that for the same finger 
in a descending scale. The difference in contour between the two 
should be noted, since it will recur in later illustrations as a typical 
phase of the movements, a might aptly be described as a saw- 
tooth curve, 6 as a scalloped curve. In a the crest of the curve 
is approximately over the descending portion thereof whereas, 
in 6 the crest is reached almost at the mid-point between descents. 
Needless to say the curve shown in Fig. 124 as typical, coincides 
in all the salient features mentioned with numerous other records 
made and is not the movement peculiar to the particular pianist 
making the record. The theoretical analysis preceding the 
illustration shows the mechanical reasons for such a curve, with 
which it would not agree, were the curve the result only of individual 
variation. 

The curves for the other fingers will naturally differ somewhat 
from those of the third finger, because the relationship of their 
movement to the hand-shift is different. I have selected the third 
finger for illustration because its movements with regard to the 
thumb are similar on both sides : in ascending scales (right-hand) 
the second finger is between it and the thumb, in descending scales, 
the fourth finger, altematingly. 

Of particular moment in scale-playing is the thumb-movement, 
requiring the passing of the thumb under the hand. The anatomical 
position of the thumb differs noticeably from that of the other 
fingers. We may expect, therefore, to find its movement in scales 
differing also from finger-movements, such as those here recorded 
for the third finger. In the first place its. ascent from the keys 
is definitely limited by the hand itself in aU positions in which it 
must get beneath the hand. In the second place, contrary to the 
band-movement, it is freer in scale-descent (right hand) than 
in scale-ascent. In scale-ascent it is shifted close to the key-level. 



Plate XVUI 



Fig. 124. Movement of the thitd finger (first intetphaJangeal joint) in an ascending (tight to 
left) and a descending (left to right) scale. Tempo : allegro. 



Fig. 125. The movement of the thumb in a rapid scale ; ascent : left to right ; descent : 

right to left. 



Fig. 126. Movement of third finger in descending (<?) and ascending (i>) scale, with full 

preparation. 


[To p, 253 






SCALES 


253 


the position of the second finger precluding a higher lift. In the 
descending scale, this interference with height is noticeable only 
at the beginning of the thumb-movement ; after this point the 
thumb is no longer under the fingers, and can be lifted amply at 
the side of the hand. The crest of this movement will thus be 
reached immediately before descent. A typical thumb-curve 
in scale passages is shown in Kg. 125. The observer stands behind 
the player, slightly to the left. The ascending movement, there- 
fore, reads from left to right. Here the curve for descent 6 is very 
similar to that for ascent in Kg. 124. The curve for ascent a is 
flatter because the hand interposes an obstacle against higher 
thumb-lift. 



Before proceeding to an analysis of the effects of intensity and 
speed upon scale movement, a salient feature of so-called opposite 
movements in piano technique deserves mention. This point 
has already been repeatedly touched upon under (isymmetry. It is 
more conspicuously noticeable, however, in scale technique. On 
the keyboard a descending scale is, spatially, the direct opposite 
of an ascending scale. This has led to the inference that physio- 
logically the movements are likewise opposites. The curves in 
Figures 124 and 126 prove that this is not the case. The curves 
for ascent and descent are not symmetrical with regard to any 
plane : one is distinctly a series of angles, the other just as distinctly 
a series of curves. The muscular coordination differs accordingly. 
This is obvious upon even a superficial study of the thumb and 
hand-formation. Movements of the same parts differ between 
ascending and descending figures. In this lies the cause for the 
difference in difiGlculty experienced by many pupils between 
ascending and descending scale-passages. In the ascending scale 
right-hand, the thumb plays most often when under the hand, 
a position ill-adapted to the thumb-stroke. Contrary to popular 
belief, it is not the passing-under of the thumb that is difficult 
but the playing of the key with the thumb held under the hand. 
The passing-under of the thumb is a flexion action which is present 
from earliest infancy as a part of the grasping reflex. But the 
coordination fixed in the nervous system is solely concerned with 
bringing the thumb toward the hand. When we play it vertically 
in that position we use it in a direction at right angles to that of 
this coordination. Any pupil will at once make the passing-under 
movement if told to touch the base of the fifth finger with the thumb- 
tip of the same hand. But the learning of the vertical thumb-stroke 



254 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

under the hand is a far more rifficnlt task. It is physio- 
logically easier when the hand is slightly snpinated (the typical 
slant toward the fifth finger), because the thumb can then be 
abducted more nearly in a vertical line. That is why the slanting 
hand is so often recommended for ascending scales in the right 
hand, and for descending scales in the left hand. 

The two distal joints of the thumb correspond to the second and 
third joints of the other fingers in that they are simple hinge-joints. 
Consequently with the thumb at key-level, movement in either 
or both of these joints can produce only horizontal motion at the 
finger-tip. The vertical movement of the finger-tip demands 
motion at some other joint. This is the meta-carpal connection, 
which, in the thumb, is situated very close to the wrist itself. It 
is normally not detected by the eye and is, accordingly, often 
overlooked in locating the source of thumb-movement in scale 
passages. It may be seen in the pictures of the hand diown in 
Chapter XXII. The movement itself is awkward, being produced 
by the long abductor of the thumb when this digit is already under 
the hand, hence in a poor position for further vertical abduction 
on account of the essentially rotary character of the thumb move- 
ment. In teaching the fundamental movements of scale playing, 
this vertical stroke will demand far more attention — ^for physio- 
logical reasons — than the mere passing-under, although the latter 
is usually given the greater pedagogical consideration. Exercises 
requiring the thumb to play while under the hand and separated 
from any horizontal movement, will be found helpful. The tendency 
to play the hand by depressing the wrist as a substitute for the 
desired thumb-action is quite natural and physiologically not 
difficult. Failure of pupils to put the thumb under promptly in 
scales is the result of misdirection of their attention, and does not 
constitute a muscular problem. The vertical stroke of the thumb, 
especially when this digit is under the hand, is a muscularly awkward 
movement, serving, from the standpoint of nature, no useful 
purpose in the life of the organism. The extent to which the 
passing-under of the thumb is actually necessary in scale playing 
is dbcussed under the effects of speed. 

Preparation, 

In no one field of piano technique is preparation of the next 
tone ox tonal sequence so firmly insisted upon as in scale playing. 
The prompt passing-under of the thumb and equally prompt 
passing-over of the hand are diligently practised from the beginning. 
Each unused finger is held well lifted, often so high that a pencil 



SCALES 


266 


can be passed over the finger holding the key depressed and under 
the two adjoining lifted fingers, lie object of such a procedure 
is to bring each moving part over its next key as early and as quickly 
as possible, holding it there stationary until the time of stroke. 
Recordiug the third finger-movement in this manner we get as a 
typical curve that diown in Fig. 126. At a the scale was played 
descendingly and very slowly ; at 6, asoaidingly, also very slowly. 
(The observer is looking across the keyboard at the finger.) The 
bright points along the curve are the points where the finger remains 
at rest. 

In a, for the descending scale, each step, as before, is represented 
by a stretch of line between two br^ht spots. Beginning at the 
left side of the figure, the third finger is held lifted (1) wMe fifth 
finger plays ; is puUed down slightly as fourth finger plays (2) ; 
descai^ to key (3) ; returns over same path (4) as second finger 
plays ; remains lifted as thumb plays, and is slufted laterally (5) ; 
the third finger plays again (6) ; returns over same path as second 
finger plays (7) ; shifts laterally as thumb plays (8) ; moves 
sympathetically (small U-shaped part) (9) as fourth finger plays ; 
descends to key (10) ; returns over same path as second finger 
plays (11) ; shifts laterally as thumb plays (12) ; descends to 
key (13) ; returns over same path as second finger plays (14). 
Beginning at the right end : in 6, the various parts of the move- 
ment are : third finger at rest (1) ; slightly lowered (2), when 
second finger plays ; third finger descends (3) ; is lifted diagonally 
as thumb plays (4) ; lowered slightly (6) as second finger plays ; 
descends again to key (6) ; returns over the same path (7) as fourth 
finger plays ; is further lifted diagonally as hand is shifted over 
thumb (8) ; descends slightly as second ^ger plays (9) ; descends 
to key (10) ; is lifted diagonally as at first (11) when thumb plays ; 
descends slightly as second finger plays (12) ; descends to key (13) ; 
returns over same path as fourth finger is played (14) ; remains 
lifted as fifth-finger is played. 

In interpreting photographs such as those in the preceding 
figure, the differences in luminosity or brightness between one 
part of a line and another must be taken into account. The 
brighter the spot or line, the slower has been the movement at that 
point ; the fainter the line, the faster did the image of the luminous 
spot pass ovM that part of the photographic film. 

The finger-movements shown in Fig. 126 represent curves 
produced when each movement is, so far as possible, prepared in 
advance. The fact that minor movements are noticeable when 
other fingers are playing shows again the principle of action and 



256 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIAITO TECHNIQUE 

reaction discussed in an earlier chapter. Although the asymmetrical 
phases of ascent and descent are somewhat less marked in such 
cmwes of preparation than in normal speed cur\res, they exist, 
none the less. The diagonal progression in the ascending scale, 
from 3 to 4 or 10 to 11 in Fig. 1266 is much more marked than the 
more horizontal transfer from 4 to 5 or 7 to 8 in a. This is of course 
necessary, since in a descending scale (right hand) the third finger 
cannot move horizontally until the second fingex has played. A 
similar condition holds for the ascending scale when the fourth 
finger plays and, accordingly, the curve between 6 and 8 in 6 is 
very similar to that between 6 and 8 in a, with direction reversed. 
In a descending scale, this lift of the third finger is necessary for 
each stroke because it is always followed by the second finger. 
In the ascending scale, on the contrary, the fourth finger plajmg 
but once in an octave, the shift occurs immediately at one time 
(3 and 10), and is delayed at the other time (6 and 13). 


Agogio Effects. 

The manner in which a scale is played differs with the speed at 
which it is played. The analysis of the touch-forms already 
illustrated, as well as the theoretical mechanical principles, leaves 
no alternative. Speed wiU affect the nature of any pianistic 
movement. 

In Fig. 127a may be seen the line described by the centre of 
the hand in a very slow ascending scale, 0 major, viewed from 
directly above. As each finger strikes the key, a slight rise in the 
hand-knucMe pulls the hand forward slightly and accounts for 
the short forward and backward shifts noticeable at the points 
where the hand is relatively at rest. But the most outstanding 
feature of the line, from the standpoint of movement, is its relative 
rectflinearity. If we exclude the shifts just mentioned, we notice 
that the hand, as a whole, is transferred along the keyboard in an 
approximately straight line. The motion results, therefore, from 
a combination of elbow extension and humerus abduction ; the 
elbow is straightened out as the hand advances along the keyboard, 
and the upper arm is lifted away from the side of the body slightly. 
But there is no appreciable forward or backward motion of the 
upper arm. 

When the same scale is played rapidly we get a curve like that 
of Fig. 1276. The appearance has changed radically. Th e strai^t- 
line effect is lost and is replaced by a series of forward and backward 
movements of the whole arm. AH points of rest have been 
eliminated and the movement is both curvilinear and continuous. 




Fig. 128. <7, Hand-movement in a descending scale, 
Fig. 127. <7, Movement of the centte of the hand in a played very slowly ; same scale, played tapidly. 

very slow, ascending scale; same scale, played rapidly. 


XX 



Fig, 132. Effect of lange on lateral arm-shift. 






SCALES 


257 


whereas, in the slow movement it was rectilinear and discontinuous. 
(Compare this with Figs. 136 and 146, showing lateral arm-transfer 
in arpeggio.) 

A similar result is found when we analyse the descending scale 
movements. Played slowly and with free arm we get the curve of 
Fig. 128a. Even at the slow tempo the forward and backward 
shifts of the arm, while the hand is transferred laterally, are readily 
discernible. This shift is seen in the slant of the line between 
two bright points, when compared with the line of the keyboard. 
Comparison with h in the same figure, which is a typical curve for 
hand-movement in a rapid descending scale, shows considerably less 
difference than that between speed of ascending scales. The reason 
for this is m the fact than when ascending slowly, the thumb 
action differs radically from that of fast scales ; whereas the 
difference m the manner of crossing the hand over the thumb in 
descending scales, does not differ so widely with changes m speed. 
There still remains, however, the marked difference in continuity ; 
a showing the expected points of rest, while h shows the unbroken 
shift along the keyboard. This, of course, is an obvious fact, 
yet it affects the underlying muscular coordinations very much. 
In one case finger-action is unaccompanied by arm-shift, m the 
other case, both phases occur concomitantly. The muscles causing 
arm-shift are a different group from those causing finger-action. 
Hence, in a slow scale the muscles acting differ from those acting 
in a rapid scale. A series of separate movements is replaced by 
a single continuous movement. If we reflect, now, upon the under- 
lying mechanical principles, we shall recall that each rest pohit is 
estabKdied by muscular inhibition, and this inhibition is not 
present in a continuous movement. 

When we combine the rapid ascending and the descending scales, 
we get, as a typical curve-form, that shown in Fig. 129. Comparison 
with Fig. 127 and Fig. 128 brings out the permanent features of 
the movement : the two forward shifts for ascent (a) with each 
lateral transfer (reading from left to right in this figure), and the 
single, slightly more marked forward shift in the descen^g scale 
(6). The superposition of the two curves shows these differences 
between the ascending and the descending movements quite clearly. 
The scale of reduction is approximately as 1 to 6, so that the forward 
and backward hand and fore-arm shift in a rapid scale, played 
moderately loudly, was approximately two inches, not a negligible 
distance in relation to the dimensions of the hand and of the key- 
board. The nature of the movement changes of course at either 
end, where the direction is reversed, and this change is noticeable 



258 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

already in the forward shift immediately preceding the change. 
The view is a top view, the point photographed is the middle of the 
hand. Finger-movements, accordingly, could not influence the 
outline of the curve. 

The fact that in all the illustrations, regardless of speed, some 
hand shift occurs — in the rapid scales to a marked degree — ^is 
interesting in view of the usual pedagogical insistence upon a quiet 
hand in scale-playing. The forward and backward arm-shift 
(6 in Fig. 127 and Fig. 128) is eliminated by such instruction, 
as far as possible. Yet in each case of rapid or slow scale that I 
examined, under normal playing conditions, this arm-shift was 
present. The movement, moreover, is quite similar to that made 
by talented pupils before they have been taught the quiet hand 
type. But I am not prepared to say whether or not it is an acquired 
or more fimdamental coordination. This problem is primarily a 
psychological one. However, I do feel that the teacher frequently, 
by watching these hand-movements, reads accents and irregularities 
into the tonal result that actually do not exist. That is to say, 
the presence of such movements does not necessarily produce an 
irregular scale. This fact has led several pianists to assert that 
in a rapid scale the thumb is not passed under at all. This is an 
extreme view, which, although certainly true to some extent, is 
an exaggeration of the facts. Fig. 130 is a picture of the thumb- 
action in a rapid ascending C major scale. In this case the observer 
is facing the player, hence looks across the keyboard at the hand. 
The luminous point was attached close to the nail of the thumb. 
As soon as the thumb passes under the second or any other finger, 
this finger will fall between the light and the photographic film 
and will obscure the thumb movement. The keyboard is shown 
through a considerable range, Ihe centre of which is in direct line 
with the point of observation. This distance is that between the 
two short vertical lines. The dotted parts of the curve is the part 
of thumb-movement during which the thumb is under the other 
fingers. The extremes of this record cannot be used for diagnosis 
since the perspective is such that the results would be misleading. 
This accounts for the greater stretches of breaks at the right side 
of the figure. 

Thus the thumb does pass under the second finger in a normal 
rapid scale, but the actual amount of passmg-under decreases as 
the speed is increased. In passing under, it never, in any of the 
records secured, completed its shift while only the second finger 
played, but covered the distance while the second and the third 
fingers played. The form of passing-under, practised while holding 



SCALES 


259 


the second and third fingers on the depressed keys, is not used in 
actual playing. It represents an extreme coordination which is 
opposed to speed. A rapid scale is played with a continuous arm- 
shift, which is accompanied by a partial passing-under of the thumb. 
This is verified by the pictures of thumb-movement shown 
in Eig. 130. 

Octave Diatonic Scales 

Diatonic scales in octaves normally consist of a combination of 
staccato touch and lateral arm-transfer. The staccato touch 
results from the repetition of fingering, the lateral transfer from 
the shift from key to key. We may expect, therefore, to find 
the coordination for staccato touch functioning plus the curves 
analysed for horizontal arm-movement. The range of the latter 
will, of course, be greatly reduced since it now covers the width 
of only one piano-key. This combination of hand-movement and 
lateral arm-shift has already been touched upon and illustrated in 
Lateral Arm-Movements (Fig. 66, a). The loop-form resulting 

nm 

Fia. 131. 

from the asymmetry of the curve remains (compare Fig. 131, with 
Fig. 66, d). Fig. 131 shows an ascending diatonic progression of 
four keys and a return over the same keys to the starting point. 
The path traversed is that for the centre of the hand, with the 
observer in a position behind the player, eye on a level with the 
keyboard. The agreement of the shape of these curves with that 
for much greater distances leads to the probability that the same 
plan of coordination is functioning, even over the small distances. 
The difficulty of recording the extremely slight muscular 
contractions needed for diatonic lateral transfer of the arm made it 
impossible to get records sufficiently definite to warrant their 
serving as an accurate basis for deduction. Accordingly I should 
not say conclusively that the free-body ” coordination, in which 
the arm is thrown through a part of its distance as a relatively 
free-body, holds for movements of so small a range as the width 
of a single piano-key. The similarity of the curves, however, 
seems to indicate that it does, A lateral shift of only one key shows 
the same loop or bow-tie effect. As the distance increases the curve 
flattens somewhat, but the asymmetry remains. This is illustrated 
in Fig. 132, which shows the curves for a rapid lateral arm-shift 
for the distances given. 



260 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 


Dymmic Effects. 

In a Eeavy portamento, taken at a moderate speed, tlie centre 
of the kand moves as skown in Fig. 133. Tke observer is on a level 
witk tke keyboard, behind tke player. Tke an^larity of the cnrve 
means discontinuity of movement, for a continuous pkysiolo^cal 
movement, with change of direction, is necessarily in curved lines. 
Tke hand in a heavy portamento is lifted to the maximum height 



Pig. 133. 


desired and poises there for a moment before descending upon the 
next key. This descent takes place in an approximately vertical 
line. Qke apex of the triangle is, therefore, not midway between 
the keys but over the key to be played. (Fig. 133 should be read 
from left to right.) The mechanical advantage of this is obvious : 
it enables the force of the descending arm to act in the direction 
of maxunal efficiency, in a direct line with the movement of the 
piano-key. The intensity is likewise reflected in the height of 
the movement, which is considerably greater than that for normal 
diatonic arm-movement. 



Pig. 134. 


In this poising over the key we meet again the factor of spatial 
preparation. Ibis is by no means an essential feature of the 
movement. It merely divides the movement into two parts, 
of which only the second is concerned with tone-production. 

The effect of intensity upon staccato octave-scales is entirely 
similar to its effect upon any staccato touch. As intensity increases, 
more and more of the arm is brought into play to produce the needed 
force. 



SCALES 


261 


Agogie Effects. 

The striking efiect of variations in speed upon a physiological 
movement is seen when we record a very slow “ martellato ” 
touch and the same touch made rapidly. In Fig. 134, which shows 
these differences, a fragment of a scale was used. At a the slow 
tempo permits the double movement characteristic of aU prepared 
movements. The hand is transferred to the next key at a fairly 
rapid rate, shoTO by the low arced curve between the peaks. It 
is then lifted to prepare for tike following heavy down-stroke. 
When tkie same touch is executed more rapidly as at h, the hand 
moves in the typical curve-form (similar to the low transfer in o), 
and all signs of preparation or double movement have vanished. 
We have found a similar difference in each other touch-form. 
Accordingly, the presence of preparation in extremely slow move- 
ments, and its absence in all moderately fast or rapid movements, 
is independent of the type of movement and must form a funda- 
m^tal characteristic of physiological movement in general. The 
physiological and mechanical advantages of such a coordination 
I have already pointed out. 

Furthermore, the similarity of the curve for a rapid marteUato 
to the curve for all other forms of lateral arm-transfer proves that 
the differences among these is muscular and does not affect the 
manner of displacement of the hand geometrically. So long as 
the speed and the range of the movement are constant the hand 
moves in the same typical way whether we use a whole-arm motion 
or a hand-staccato, a firmly fixed arm, as in martdlato, or a relaxed 
arm. Here we find that the type of movement of even the playing 
part (in this case the hand) is only indirectly affected by the muscular 
condition, else the curve for a martellato arm-movement would 
differ from the others. This, the records show, is not the case. 
Under Tone-Qualities this point is taken up in de^. 



CHAPTER XIX 


Abpeggio 

From the standpoint of muscular movement the arpeggio, to a 
certain extent, may he considered an enlarged scale. The fingering 
is similar, and the two salient features of diatonic progression in 
scales : the putting-imder of the thumb and the putting-over of the 
hand are also the salient features of arpeggio, with the difference 
in movement one of degree. Much that has been said about scales 
will therefore apply as well to the arpeggio. But range, we have 
seen, is one determinant of coordination and consequently, the 
inm-ease of distance has its own effect, as a result of which the 
technique of scale-playing is not exactly a diminutive of arpe^o- 
playing when measured in terms of muscular coordination. 

Weigh. 

We may take as an example of this difference the factor of weight. 
In the chapter on Weight-Transfer the dependence of the degree 
to which weight could be transferred, upon the speed of finger- 
lift was pointed out. In a scale the third finger lifts in order to 
make room for the crossing of the second finger which follows the 
thumb. In an arpeggio a similar condition holds, except for the 
fact that the distances are now greater. In a 0 major scale the 
third finger, right hand, normally plays on E, the thumb on F, 
the second finger on G. The distance between third and second 
fingers is a third, one and seven-eighth inches. In a C major 
arpe^o the third finger, right hand, plays G and the second finger, 
E above, the distance between being a sixth, or four and eleven- 
sirfeenth inches. It is, therefore, doubly necessary that the 
third finger move promptly, with the result that the weight- 
transfer and even the legato are impaired, because one determinant 
of weight-transfer is the speed of finger-lift (see page 141), Tbia 
is readfly demonstrated by the dynamograph, on which a diatonic 
succession will show much less fluctuation in weight-transfer 
than an arpeggio played at the same speed and intensity. Needless 
to say, speed and loudness must be carefully controlled, because 
of their marked effect upon weight-transfer. Keyboard distance 

262 



AEPEGGIO 


263 


thus becomes a third determinant of weight-transfer. I add it here, 
instead of having listed it with speed and intensity, because it is an 
indirect speed-variation : an increase in keyboard distance being 
necessarily accompanied by greater finger-speed in lift, and greater 
hand-speed in the lateral transfer of the arm in order to keep the 
rate of tonal succession constant. 

The distance of a fourth, on white keys, is two and three-quarters 
inches. The length of a fairly long thumb, measured from the 
carpal joint, is about four inches. With this length as radius, 
it will take a central angle of about forty degrees for the tip of the 
thumb to stretch the interval of a fourth. This angle is normally 
within the range of thumb adduction and flexion. Hence a scale 
may be played without a shift of the arm. Even where the thumb 
passes under the fourth finger with the keyboard distance three 
and eleven-sixteenth inches, the thumb can still reach the desired 
key without arm-shift. But in an arpeggio the thumb covers 
the distance of an octave, six and seven-sixteenth inches. It is 
obviously impossible for any human thumb to do this unassisted. 
Allowing ninety degrees as the maximum angle of thumb adduction 
and flexion (as a matter of fact the norm is considerably less) it 
would require a thumb four and five-eighths inches long just to 
reach the outer key edge with an awkward angle of 45° at each 
key. A half-inch fiirther in on the key would make the length over 
five inches. Again, taking the normal angle of thumb adduction 
and flexion of approximately fifty degrees and allowing even ten 
degrees more, we should require a thumb six and one-half inches 
long to cover the octave without the aid of arm-shift. 

In any arpeggio, therefore, the passing-under of the thumb 
must be accompanied by some arm-shift. Since most (but by no 
means all) of this movement occurs in a horizontal plane, the move- 
ment in this plane may be recorded by the instrument used for 
similar experiments m scales. This consisted of two horizontal 
aluminium rods, carrying writing points which transmitted their 
movement to a revolving drum. By attaching one lever to the 
first phalanx of the thumb and other to the fore-arm at the wrist, 
we can accurately determine the' time and space relationships in 
the horizontal transfer. The tracings for a slow (prepared) and a 
rapid arpeggio are shown in Eig. 135. For the sake of clearness 
in visualizing the keyboard I have kept horizontal arm and thumb 
movements horizontal in the figure. The time-line, given in half- 
seconds, is vertical, to be read upward. Displacement to the right 
in the figure is equivalent to movement toward the right (ascend- 
ing) at the keyboard. 



264 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

The strikiiig parallelism of the lines show better than any words, 
the degree to which thumb action in arpeggio is accompanied 
by arm-shift. Whenever the thumb moves to the right, the arm 
moves likewise ; when the thumb rests, the arm rests also. The 



“ putting-imder ’’ of the thumb, therefore, is but part of the shift, 
the remaining part being contributed by the movement of the arm. 
Without this arm-shift the angle at which the thumb-tip would 
play ^assuming that the thumb could stretch the octave — would 



AEPEGGIO 


265 


make its efieotive use impossitle. On tlie other hand, axm-shift 
alone, as later illustrations will show, is also ineffective, because it 
forces the thumb to leap an octave in too short a time. This means 
greater arm-speed, and with the inertia of the arm behind it, 
normally resiits in an undesirable accentuation of the thumb- 
tone. 

Figure 135 is to be interpreted as follows : Slow tempo, thumb- 
line : a to 6, thumb resting over first key ; 6-c passing-under of 
the thumb to its octave ; c-eZ thumb resting on this key ; d-e 
thumb pulled slightly sidewise by passing the hand over it in order 
to permit the second finger to play its next key ; f-g thumb passing 
under to the next octave, same as 6-c. g-h thumb resting on key. 
Slow tempo, wrist-line : a'-i' wrist stationary before beginning ; 
6'-c' fore-arm is shifted to help thumb, which is moving at the same 
time, to reach its key ; c'-<Z' arm stationary while second and third 
fingers play ; df-e' arm is shifted sidewise to bring second finger 
over its next key *, f-g* arm is shifted to help thumb, as in V-c*. 
g*-h* wrist approximately stationary. 

Eapid tempo, thumb-line : 0-5, thumb stationary over its key ; 
6-c, lateral shift of thumb to reach its octave ; momentary 
rest upon this key (between one-sixteenth and one-twentieth of 
a second) ; d-f shift of the thumb to the next octave. The section 
corresponding to d-e in the slow arpeggio is entirely absent. /-^, 
thumb momentarily at rest as at c-d. Rapid tempo, wrist line : 
a'-J', arm stationary before beginning ; 6'-c', lateral shift accom- 
panying thumb shift ; while thumb remains momentarily at rest 
(chZ), arm continues unbrokenly on its way with, perhaps, some 
very small variations in its actual speed, shown by fluctuations 
in its line ; c'-/', path of arm corresponding to part d-f of the thumb 
movement. 

Once again we find speed changing the coordination of the 
movement. In the slow arpeggio periods of movement alternate 
witloi periods of rest. It is necessary to mention here that the slow 
arpeggio was played in accordance with the principle of preparation. 
In the rapid arpeggio the arm-movement is continuous. It is 
interesting to note that the actual speed of the parts of the move- 
ment does not increase, in the slow arpeggio the actual movements 
are made as rapidly as in a fast arpeggio, but rest periods between, 
prolong the time for the entice movement. In a rapid ascending 
arpeggio the thumb retains periodic motion, but the lateral arm- 
shift is a continuous movement. It is another example of a steady, 
basic movement upon which are built the smaller, periodic 
movements of the fingers. 



266 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

If the arm be transferred only in a horizontal direction, th' 
thumb will have relatively little vertical range, since in the stretchec 
position demanded by an arpeggio, when compared with a scale 
the arch of the hand cannot be maintained so well. In orde 
to gain thumb-range, the hand may be lifted somewhat by raisin{ 
the wrist, which enables the thumb to reach its goal and play mor< 
easily. This lift at the same time carries with it a slight forwarc 
arm-motion. The shortness of the thumb when compared wit! 
the other fingers is thus aided and the thumb is brought more ove: 
the keys. This combination of movement is in line with th< 
principle of coordination that demands greatest possible ease o 
motion. By combining a lift of the wrist with a forward movemen 
of the elbow and some flexion of the thumb, the thumb-tip ii 
brought over its key without reaching the extreme of any move 
ment. With a quiet hand, or even minimal arm-displacement 
the thumb would have to act at the extreme of its range, and th( 
muscular strain involved would seriously impair the freedom anc 
coordination of the movement. That is to say, the attempt t( 
play an arpeggio with a quiet hand is opposed to both freedon 
and speed. An arpeggio with a really quiet hand is physiologicall) 
impossible. 

We have then, in arpeggio, simultaneous movement of the wris1 
region in three planes : the lateral-horizontal, the forward- 
horizontal, and the vertical. A point on a body making sue! 
a movement will describe a path somewhat like a spiral. Before 
considering this as it is actually found in the records of arpeggios 
played, the movements in the separate planes should be discussed 

Fig. 136 is a top view of the movement of the centre of the hanc 
in a rapid arpeggio, C major ascending and descending, the directior 
being shown by the arrows. This picture shows the forwarc 
and backward displacement of the hand in rapid arpeggio. Ir 
the ascending curve the hand, as the thumb plays, is drawn awaj 
from the keyboard ; it is then pushed forward and raised as the 
thumb passes under, pulled back just a trifle as the thumb reaches 
for its next key and the hand passes over the thumb ; pushed 
forward again as the thumb passes under. The descent is a simplei 
curve, consisting of a wide arc. This results from the forward 
position of the hand necessitated by the thumb-stroke. The 
thumb-tip can reach the keys only if the hand is well over the keys, 
a position which would require the second and the third fingers to 
play close to, if not between black keys. By shifting the arm 
forward and backward this restriction is eliminated. The difference 
between the ascending and the descending curves illustrates again 




[To face p, 266 





[To facep* 267 



AEPEGGIO 


267 


the asymmetry of opposite movement in piano technique to which 
I have repeatedly dxawn attention. The ascending movement is 
for each octave a double shift, whereas the descending movement 
is a single shift. The amplitudes (forward and backward distances) 
are likewise different. This, of course, could not be otherwise, 
so long as the pivot (the thumb) is at one end of the playing parts 
instead of in the middle. 

The exact curve, however, varies somewhat with the individual. 
An additional curve for arpeggio made by another pianist is given 
in Fig. 137. 

Comparison with Fig. 136 shows the individual difference. 
(Compare also with Fig. 129.) At the same time, however, the 
general fixed character of each movement, as just described, remains : 
the double shift for the ascending, the single shift for the descending 
movement, and the more forward position for the descending 
movement. Other differences are seen in the slant of the ascending 
line. In Fig. 136 the two loops of the ascending curve run parallel 
to the keyboard, in Fig. 137 the second loop in each octave shows 
a greater forward shift than the first. An extreme form of this 
tendency toward greater shift at the end of the octave is given in 
Fig. 138, which was played without any passing-under of the thumb 
whatever, and, as indicated, with a marked forward and backward 
shift of the hand. The greater forward shift is necessary because 
of the relative shortness of the thumb. In the usual arpeggio 
movement, a rise in the wrist helps to bring the hand forward, 
and since the photographs were made from a point above the key- 
board, this rise is not shown and results in a foreshortening of the 
actual path traversed by the wrist. The difference in the amplitude 
of the forward shift, between Fig. 137 and Fig. 138, proves that 
in the normal playing of an arpeggio some passing-xmder of the 
thumb, as a matter of fact a marked degree thereof, is present. 
The hand of course can be transferred laterally without thumb- 
action and likewise without forward or backward shift. But the 
resulting arpeggio would be defective in sound and, at the same 
time, rather awkward in execution. In such a case the thumb 
would remain stationary over its key, the second and third fingers 
likewise. The lateral shift would then be made in exactly the same 
manner as that for octaves, discussed in Chapter XIII, whereupon 
the hand would come to rest over the keys in the next octave. 
This movement would be typified by that shown in Fig. 66, A, B, 
and analysed there as an incoordinated type of movement. 
Accordingly, we never find it employed in effective arpeggio. But — 
and this point is important — ^the fact that any forward or backward 



268 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

shift of the hand is present, proves also that arm-naovement con- 
tributes materially to the thumb-action. The mechanical space 
relationships analysed at the beginning of this chapter, showed 
the physiological impossibility of playing an arpeggio with quiet 
fore-arm. ®b.e photographs, with their forward and backward 
arm-shift, prove that such arm-movement, of course, in addition 
to the lateral shift, is an actual part of the arpeggio technique, 
present to a degree much greater than is generaUy supposed. It 
is even present quite unmistakably, in rapid scales. (See Figs. 127, 
128.) All rapid exercises, therefore, requiring a quiet hand with 
the passing-under of the thumb do not teach the movement as it 
is actually used. Whatever value they have must be found in 
the training which they give in thumb-movement and the psycho- 
logical effect which excessive movement may have on the player. 
There is room here for experimentation with the free arm-movement 
in slow practice instead of the fixed-position type of the preparation 
method. In fact, the relative merits of the two methods of pro- 
cedure cannot be determined off-hand in any phase of technique, 
and the proper choice of either is of importance not only in arpeggio, 
but in all other passages demanding finger, hand, or arm-sMt. 
I have always believed that the fixation or preparation method — 
to some extent at least — has been adhered to on the piano because 
of the position-technique on the stringed instruments. But 
analysis shows the two to be radically different. On the violin, 
for example, an ascending scale may be played with 2-3-4--5 (I use 
the piano fingering ; on the violin it would be 1-2-3-4), but if 
further ascent on the same string be desired, the fifth finger must 
give way to permit the second to pass it. This can be done only 
with a rapid, abrupt shift. On the piano we have no such deter- 
mining of position by the mechanical construction of the instrument. 
Even when we pass the second finger over the fifth, we add wrist- 
abduction, which does not help on the violin. Accordingly, the 
preparation procedure remains absolutely necessary for string- 
technique. But this does not prove its necessity for piano- 
technique. 

Two typical arpeggio movements (again the middle of the hand) 
are those of Fig. 139. They are viewed from the front, that is to 
say, directly across the keyboard, facing the player. From right 
to left is the ascending curve, from left to right, the descending. 
The omitted portions of the curve result from the interposition 
of the fingers of the player’s hand. We note a marked asymmetry. 
In the ascending curve there is considerable vertical displacement, 
accompanied by a corresponding rise and fall of the wrist. The 



AEPEGGIO 


269 


•wrist drops as the thumb plays, is lifted to accommodate the 
passing-under of the thumb, and drops when the thumb plays 
again. No such vertical displacement occurs in the descending 
movement. Here the back of the hand traverses an almost straight 
horizontal line. Its level is considerably above that of the ascending 
curves, which in their highest points, the crests of the waves, do 
not touch the upper lines. The hand, therefore, is carried at a 
hi^er level, or, the wrist is noticeably raised in a descending and 
lowered in an ascending arpeggio. The observations aU apply 
to the ri^t hand. For the left hand the directions are reversed. 

]ji Fig. 140 is dio-wn another view of an arpeggio repeated three 
times. The observer here stands slightly above the keyboard 
level, and behind the player, to the right. Accordingly, vertical 
displacements which are sho-wn in Fig. 139 in direct projection 
are h«e shown in perspective, that is to say, foreshortened some- 


a 



Fig. 139 . 


what. But the salient features of the curve are readily discernible. 
The ascent (from left to ri^t) sho'ws the vertical displacement 
with the lower level, and the descent, the horizontal line -with raised 
■wrist. The touching of the two lines in the middle results from the 
forward diift noade during ascent (see Figs. 136 and 137) which, 
viewed from the angle at which the picture was made causes the 
two lines to coincide at that point. The fact should also be noted 
that the ascending curve sho-ws a division into two parts similar 
to that characterizing the forward and backward movements (Figs. 
136 and 137). Such a correlation means that the -wrist, as it is 
lifted, also moves forward, and as it is dropped, begins -to move 
backward. Adding to this the lateral arm-displacement results 
in a movement approximating an elongated spiral. In the 
descending movement the spiral is replaced by a forward and back- 
•ward drift with a minimuTn of vertical movement, or, as Fig. 139 



270 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

shows, none at all. The path traversed by the wrist, in a descending 
arpeggio therefore, is accurately represented by Fig. 136 or 137, 
allowing of course for the uniformly higher wrist-level at which 
the movement occurs. It is difficult to present to the eye in a single 
figure, the complete wrist-movement of an ascending arpeggio, 
since this occurs simultaneously in three planes. Viewed from 
angles of approximately forty-five degrees, so that the movement 
in all planes will be at least partly recorded, we get as typical 
curves those of Fig. 141 and Fig. 142, in which the ascending 
lines (left to right) show the fore-shortened spiral movement. 
Eegardless of the angle at which the movements are photographed, 
the asymmetry of the descending and ascending curves is readily 
noticeable. It results, primarily, from the fact that the putting- 
under of the thumb and its subsequent playing, afiects vertical 
arm displacement much more than the putting-over of the hand. 
The diagrammatic illustrations of arpeggio curves given in various 
text-books, showing the descent as the reverse of the ascent are 
not true to the physiological mechanics of the movement. I 
mention the point because it illustrates again the danger of drawing 
conclusions from mere observation of rapid movements. 

Firiger-Movement 

Although arm-movement, as the preceding figures show, plays 
a much greater role in arpeggio than m scales, it certainly does not 
entirely eliminate finger-movement. The difference between Fig. 
138 in which any passing-under of the thumb has been eliminated 
and Fig. 136 played with normal thumb-action shows the extent 
to which thumb-movement modifies the curve. Then, too, some 
vertical finger-stroke is needed for any key-depression. Since finger- 
movements take place in a vertical plane and a lateral horizontal 
plane, photographing them from a point horizontal with the key- 
board and directly in front of the player will show the movement 
in both planes. 

In Fig. 143 may be seen typical curves for the thumb {a) and the 
second-finger (6) movements in a rapid ascending arpeggio. (The 
observer is looking across the keyboard directly at the player’s 
hand, and in the same horizontal plane. Eead from right to left.) 
The slant of both lines shows that the lateral shift of the hand 
(measured by the lateral shift of the second finger), takes place 
simultaneously with the finger-stroke. When the tempo is 
sifflciently rapid no sign of preparation : transferring the thumb 
with quiet hand, remains. This agrees with the curves shown 
in Fig. 135. At the beginning of the movement (at c) the thumb 




Figs. 141 and 142. Hand-movement in arpeggio, showing effect of intensity : a, mp / h, ff. 






Plate XXIV 




Fig. 144. Same as Fig. 143, descending. Horkontal view. 



Fig 14 j: Hand-movement in a slow arpeggio. Vertical view. 
Compare with Figs. 156 and 137. 





ARPEGGIO 


271 


crossed under the second finger, hence the line made by the thumb- 
tip is obscured at this point. After the motion was fully under 
way, however, as at the middle octave, the second finger had already 
begun its ascent before the thumb passed under, otherwise the 
thumb-line could not show across the second finger , line, as at d, 
where the second finger descends to play at e. In the record here 
given the thumb passed under the second finger between the points 
/ and g the rather wide distance resulting from the fact that the 
second finger was at the same time moving in the same direction 
as the thumb, hence lengthened the distance of obscurity. Such 
a coordination indicates the non-legato character of a rapid arpeggio, 
which, as a touch demanding finger-repetition (especially thumb 
repetition) naturally precludes a high degree of legato (see p. 141). 
The records of arm-movements in the various planes bear this 
out, since such arm-movements tend to pull the fingers from the 
keys, either vertically or horizontally and hence destroy the legato 
somewhat. 

This simultaneity of movement holds for the descending arpeggio 
as well, a typical movement form of whichis given in Fig. 144, a being 
the thumb-line, 6 the second-finger line. As in the preceding figure 
the observer is looking across the keyboard at the player’s hand. 
(Read this figure from left to right.) The thumb passes behind 
the second finger at the points marked with arrows. If the 
preparation-theory held, the thumb would have to be over its key 
before the second finger played. The fact that, in actual rapid 
playing, the thumb passes the second finger while the latter is 
already descending, points out not a sequence of movements 
(first thumb, then finger), but simultaneous movement. 

But if the arpeggio is non-legato, the weight of the arm cannot 
be transferred from finger to finger, much less from finger to thumb. 
So that, here again, we cannot speak of weight-transfer or weight- 
touch. 

Tempo, 

In the chapter on Scales, tempo was named as one determinant 
of the movement. A similar effect is noticed in arpeggio. The 
forms which we have thus far been considering are all records of 
the rapid arpeggio, as it is foxmd in many etudes and advanced 
compositions. When the tempo is reduced, the mechanical basis 
of the movement changes. The same arm-weight is to be moved 
through the same distance, but at a different rate of speed. The 
distribution of forces must, therefore, vary. In the first place, 
the degree of legato may be increased because no need for a rapid 



272 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

finger-lift exists in a very slow arpeggio, and upon slowness of 
finger-lift legato or weight-transfer depends. In the second place, 
the need for holding each key until its successor is played will cause 
a change in the arm-movement. 

The slow movement may be made in either of two ways : by a 
continuous steady movement of slow rate, or by a more rapid 
shift from one position to another, with momentary rests at these 
positions. In the case of slow scales (see Figs. 127a, 128a) and slow 
lateral arm-transfer (see Fig. 135) the movement consisted not of 
a uniform, slow movement, but of a more rapid shift into the new 
position followed by a short rest in this position. The same thing 
happens in a slow arpeggio of which Fig. 146 is a typical example. 
The sharper line shows the ascending curve, the duller line the 
descending curve. The mid-point of the hand was photographed. 
A study of the figure shows agreement with the physiological 
mechanics of the movemeuts studied in earlier chapters. The 
presence of light spots, with fainter lines between, shows the points 
at which the hand was relatively at rest. The steady “ swing 
of the rapid arpeggio has thus been replaced by a series of lateral 
shifts and rests. The displacement of similar letters, particularly 
the C’s, which are a key and a half nearer the bass in the descending 
than in the ascending curve, illustrates the pronation of the fore- 
arm (hence the hand also) which is greater in a descending than in 
an ascendmg arpeggio. The pronation naturally throws the point 
of light towards the thumb-side of the hand. Some movement 
m the radio-ulnar articulation has thus taken place. The forward 
and backward shifts, noticeable on both the ascendmg and the 
descending curves, result not only from a forward and backward 
arm-shift, but also from a raising and lowering of the wrist : raising 
throws the hand forward, lowering does the reverse. This forward 
shift is most noticeable in the descending C’s, and results from the 
shortness of the thumb and the raising of the wrist made to facilitate 
the legato with the following G. The several smaller shifts from 
C to E and from B to G of the ascending curve show a modifi.ed 
portamento^ or rather arm-legato, with moderate raising and lowering 
of the wrist. 

The player, in this instance, was left free to play the keys as 
he would under actual playing conditions. Tbe results show that, 
when this is done, a slow arpeggio subdivides itself into a series of 
separate movements. The entire arm takes part in the movement, 
and there is no attempt to restrict movement to a lateral straight- 
line arm-shift. The touch-form closely approaches the arm-legato 
which we have already studied. 



AEPEGGIO 273 

The standard form of preparatory exercises for arpeggio demands 
a quiet hand, or at any rate, no forward or backward shift. (It is 
a practice-form similar to that given for scales.) And, for the same 
reason as in scales, it drills a movement that is not used in actual 
playing, not even in slow arpeggios. Its value, therefore, must 
lie in the emphasis which it places upon a particular phase of the 
movement : the actual passing-under of the thumb. Such exercises 
form an extreme type of movement, of which the type shown in 
Fig. 138 forms the opposite extreme. Neither ty^e is used in actual 
playing to the exclusion of the other type. Instead, both phases 
are always present. There is some passing-under of the thumb, 
and there is some hand-shift or arm-sldft before this passing-under 
is complete. It is another instance of a basic arm-movement, 
upon which, while it is in progress, the more distal and smaller 
finger movements are superimposed. 

The slant of the curves for both finger and thumb in the rapid 
arpeggio approximates that for the slow or moderately fast lateral 
arm-transfer more closely than that for the rapid arm-transfer, 
inasmuch as the curves are somewhat angular, with their apices 
nearly over the second of the two keys played. (Compare Fig. 144 
with Fig. 66, h and c.) There is no discrepancy here. In spite of 
the speed of the arpeggio no single finger-movement involves 
rapid repetition. Between each two thumb-strokes, two finger- 
strokes intervene, and between each two second finger-strokes, a 
thumb-stroke and a third finger-stroke intervene. 

Finally, the asymmetry of the curves for slow arpeggio should be 
mentioned. In neither case is descent the geometric or physiologic 
reverse of ascent. This has already been mentioned for the rapid 
arpeggio, and Fig. 145 shows that it holds as well for the slow 
arpeggio, the sharper line (ascent) having a contour quite different 
from the paler line (descent). 


Since amplitude is a determinant of intensity in all physiological 
movements, we can expect an increase in the amplitude of the 
arpeggio movement with an increase in tone wherever the movement 
is in line with tone-production. The difference is shown in Fig. 139, 
for the vertical plane, a being an arpeggio played ff, b one played 
mp, Tbe greater vertical distance between thetwo lines in a indicates 
the increase in amplitude. However, the actual vertical displace- 
ments along the ascending curve in a are, in this record, not greater 
than in 6. This results from the fact that in order to produce 
greater tone the wrist cannot be as relaxed as in soft tone-production. 



274 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

(See Relaxation.) And with less relaxation conies less vertical 
wrist-movement. The difference is so slight here that I do not 
care to risk a definite conclusion on this point. But all doubt about 
the effect of intensity upon amplitude of movement is dispelled 
when we study Figs. 141 and 142. Here are four keyboard views, 
a in both figures representing pianissimo arpeg^os, 6 representing 
them/orimimo, all played all^ro. The increase in amplitude shows 
in both the vertical and the forward horizontal planes. Needless 
to say the left-hand ends of the curves, recordmg the approach 
to and departure from the keyboard, are not to be used for inter- 
pretation. Such an increase in arm-movement is in accordance 
with the principle of spread of tension. Not that the arm-weight 
is used. This is just as impossible, where thumb-transposition is 



involved, mfortissiim as in pianissimo. As a matter of fact it is less 
possible in loud than in soft passages. The spread of tension and 
the greater arm-movement result from the necessary fixation of 
fulcra, by means of which the fingers can transmit the force of their 
stroke into the key without loss. This, in turn, means that with an 
increase in tonal intensity goes an increase in range or speed of 
finger-movement. To verify this, the movement of the third finger 
was recorded for a pianissimo and a forte arpeggio, Fig. 146. The 
point of light was attached to the second phalanx and the movement 
photographed directly across the keyboard. Differences in the 
height of finger-lift are smaller than might be expected. This 
results from the fact that in any rapid arpeggio the third finger 
must be lifted in order to pass readily over the plajdng thumb. 



AEPEGGIO 


275 


and the finger-lift in a soft arpeggio is thus greater than that actually 
needed for tone-production withthatfinger. Somedifferenceremains, 
however, a, the curve for the soft arpeggio being about four-fifths 
as high as that for the loud arpeggio, 6. The major difference, 
however, is in finger-speed, the descent of the finger in h being more 
rapid (more nearly vertical) than the similar descent in a. The 
type of curve for both h and a is interesting also in that it shows that 
the maximum point of finger-lift is reached immediately before 
key-stroke, and not immediately after key-release. In other words, 
the finger either is not lifted rapidly to its maximum height and 
held there until the next descent begins, but is lifted gradually, 
reaching its maximum lift just in time for the next descent, or the 
lateral shift of the hand is more rapid in places. This causes the 
points n to be shifted toward fibager-descent. During finger-lift the 
hand shifts over the thumb thus displacing, laterally, the third 
finger. This shift does not account for the entire asymmetry, 
however, since shortly before n is reached both a and 6 show an 
additional finger-lift where the curves rise more abruptly. (Pig. 135 
showing the lateral shift of the hand proves the steadiness of move- 
ment in a rapid arpeggio.) The shift is more noticeable in 6, for the 
loud tone, and illustrates the preliminary thrust {Anhuh) described 
in detail under Finger-Stroke. 

The practical significance of this effect of intensity upon finger- 
stroke in arpeggio is in the fact that strength of fitnger muscles 
again is shown to be necessary, this time for a loud and clear 
arpeggio. Since it is impossible to transfer arm-weight in a finger 
sequence such as that demanded by arpeggio (see Chapter XI), only 
finger-strength can supply the force, if the tones of the arpeggio 
are to be evenly loud. Arpeggios played with this attempted 
arm-weight transfer are not clear, the third or fourth finger especially 
playing weakly. The same condition exists on a smaller plan in 
scale playing. In fact, it is doubly necessary to develop finger 
strength in arpeggio because the fingers play in an abducted 
(spread) position ; and flexion, in this position, is more difi&cult 
than in the normal scale-position. Fig. 146 ^ows the typical 
finger thrust for a loud tone, proving that it is finger-stroke that is 
responsible for the tonal increase. If it were arm-weight, no 
additional finger-lift would be needed ; in fact, the best transfer 
can be made with least finger-lift, because lack of percussiveness 
(see p. 144) has been shown to be one determinant of weight- 
transfer. h in Fig, 146 would, in such a case, show less amplitude 
and steepness than a, which is just the opposite of the actual con- 
dition. 



276 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

Arpeggio technique, therefore, demands more than arm-shift, 
the passing-under of the thumb, and the passing-over of the hand. 
It denian<& the training of the fingers for a firm stroke in chord 
position. The various broken-chord figures, within a single octave, 
played forte, with the tones held, thus form an excellent preparatory 
group for arpeggio, to which the thumb-shift and hand-shift may 
be added as the next steps. 



CHAPTER XX 


Misoellaneotjs Movements 

The graphic recording of pianistic movements opens a field of 
tremendously interesting possibilities. Not only does it throw light 
upon the hitherto obscure question of individual style, as I shall 
attempt to show in a later chapter, hut it also simplifies problems 
of fingering, aids the teacher in diagnosis of movements, the 
details of which are too quick for the eye to detect, reveals the 
limitations of free movements caused by the mechanical construc- 
tion of the keyboard, and illustrates the geometric deficiencies 
of awkward technical movement, among which the movements 
of untalented pupils are prominent. Then, too, there is the mete 
theoretical interest in the form and proportions of the geometric 
figures themselves. 

The field is wide — all too wide for an adequate inclusion in a 
single volume, because the entire literature of the piano stands at 
the disposal of the investigator. The selection from this literature 
of repres«itative examples is not an easy one ; and generalizations 
from insufficient examples are frau^t with danger. I have selected 
for presentation a number of photographs of certain typical pianistic 
movements: chromatic octaves, octave chord figures, broken 
chords, diatonic figuration and the like, and have then added 
a few miscellaneous examples taken from well-known passages 
of some standard compositions. In reading the curves the following 
relationships must be remembered : — 

Since the middle of the hand was the point photographed, its 
projection (in octave figures for example) will not correspond to 
the lettered keys of the keyboard. "V^en an octave C is played, 
the mid-point of the band is normally over F or 6, sometimes shifted 
more one way or the other, and its projection will be so recorded. 

All passages descmding on the keyboard are recorded by curves 
which must be read from right to left. The curves for aU ascending 
passages must be read from left to right in the figures. The observer 
stands directly over the keyboard looking vertically down at the 
player’s hand. Records are of the right hand, unless otherwise 
stated. 


377 



278 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

The begimnng of the curves, where the hand approaches the first 
key played, and the end of the curves, where the hand either remains 
on the last key, or is withdrawn jErom the keyboard, are of no 
consequence in the present study. 

Fingeringi 

The value of one type of fingering over another rests, or should 
rest, in the greater ease and smoothness of the requisite move- 
ment in so far as it can meet the musical demands of the passage. 
The wide variation found in the fingering recommended by editors 
such as D’Albert, Von Biilow, Joseffy, Klindworth, and Busoni, 
is of more than mere academic interest. It reflects, very distinctly, 
the individuality of technical style of the various editors. A change 
of a single finger may mean a considerable change in the movement 
itself. Fig. 147 illustrates the difference between the playing of 
the given passage when the fingerings given are used. The fingering 
above the notes refers to curve a ; that below the notes, to curve b. 
The straight line effect in a is typical of the older school, in which 
hand- and arm-movements were reduced to a minimum ; 6, in the 
same figure, typifies the later free-arm movement, made necessary 
by the placing of the thumb on black keys. The analysis in preceding 
chapters throws some light upon the differences in value between 
two such fingerings. From a muscular standpoint that at a is to be 
preferred, since it produces the desired tonal effect with a mm imuTn 
of movement. The forward and backward shift of the hand in 6 adds 
nothing to the tonal result, and must, therefore, from a purely 
muscular standpoint, be considered superfluous movement. The 
advantage of h lies m the slightly greater simplicity of fingering, 
4-3-2-1 being uniformly repeated. But this advantage is outweighed 
by the loss in accuracy of dynamic control which normally accom- 
panies a shift of the hand. The inequality can, of course, be over- 
come with practice, but often some vestige of it remains. A move- 
ment, the object of which is equal stroke-intensity, is normally 
more diflBicult to execute if various parts of the hand and arm are 
used than if the same part or similar parts are used. The forward 
and backward shift in b Fig. 147 is an arm-movement, occurring 
only when the thumb plays a black key. But it covers also the time 
during which the other fingers are playing. It adds, therefore, a 
difliculty in finger control. And a sufficiently sensitive dynamo- 
graph will record such variations even after prolonged, and 
apparently successful practice. In such a case the differences 
are reduced to a minimum which is too small to be detected at the 
rate or at the dynamic level at which the passage is played. But 



Fig. 148 

Figs. 147 and 148. Effects of fingering upon hand-movements. 


VJ o faer /). a7S 







MISCELLAIJEOUS MOVEMENTS 


279 


the fact that their minuteness prevents their being immediately 
recognized as intensity differences, does not mean that they may 
be ignored, because in these and similar minute differences may 
lie one factor of individual style. The trill in thirds at the beginning 
of Chopin’s Etude, Op. 25, No. 6, may be played with a slight forward 
and backward shift of the arm. But it will normally sound less 

finished ” than if done purely with finger-action. And as a matter 
of fact it is often played with a quiet hand by the finest 
technicians. 

From the standpoint of physiological mechanics, then, a passage 
should be fingered so that tones of equal intensity are played by 
similar parts of the arm ; in the example given, as at a. On the 
other hand, where dynamic variations are wanted, a change of the 
playing-unit is often very desirable. If, for example, the F-sharp 
and the C-sharp in Fig. 147 needed an accent, the use of the thumb 
could give it more readily and physiologically more economically 
than the fingering at a. 

An interestiug example of the effect of fingering upon the move- 
ment is given in two measures from the last movement of Beethoven’s 
Sonata Appassionata. The fingering above the notes produces the 
curve shown in Fig. 148a ; the fingering below the notes, that in 
Fig. 1486. The two curves, with the exception of the loop at the 
inner left hand side, are entirely different ; one shows numerous 
pronounced forward and backward arm-shifts, the other, a relatively 
quiet hand, the arm shifting only when the passage passes from 
F-minor to its later repetition a half-tone higher. The lateral 
shift of the hand is likewise less in a than in 6, covering approxi- 
mately four keys in one case and six in another. The quiet hand 
is normally to be preferred. However, other things frequently 
affect this difference. The fingering at a is rather difl&cult for small 
hands, or short fingers, whereas that at 6 for the same type of hand 
is considerably easier. As a matter of fact the record at 6 was made 
by a pianist with a small hand, who insisted that the fingering 
was decidedly superior to that at a. I suspect that this rating 
resulted from his own playing of the passage. And if such a prefer- 
ence exists for this passage, similar preferences will exist for other, 
similar passages. The shift of the arm is substituted for abduction 
of the thumb, and arm-movement is used to make up for the lack 
of stretch between fingers. The playing, therefore, takes on certain 
fairly uniform characteristics which would be absent in the playing 
of other pianists. Thus we approach the technical style of the player. 
The example given is another illustration of the effect of physio- 
logical differences upon instrumental style. The converse of this. 



280 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

relationsidp is found in the adaptation of fingering to the hand- 
formation of the pupil. The fingering of a passage should not, 
in many instances, be applied fixedly to all hand-types. Instead, 
it should be varied to suit the structure of the individual hand, 
so long as the change is in keepmg with the musical context of the 
passage. A particular abnormality, let us say, high webs between 
the third and the fourth, and between the fourth and the fifth 
fingers, will make abduction among these fingers quite difficult, 
and the player frequently substitutes the third for the fourth finger 
in chordal structures demanding wide abduction. 

Keyboard Limitations. 

It is a well-known fact among pianists that the standard build 
of the piano keyboard is not the most perfect form. As a result, 
numerous other types of keyboard have been invented from tine 
to time, such as the curved type, the duplex type, the Janko- 
keyboard, and others, ih spite of the advantages ofiEered by these, 
the straight horizontal form, dating back to the precursors of the 
piano, has maintained its preeminent position. Piano technique 
has been forced to adapt itself to this form of keyboard, and the 
ejffect of the latter upon technical movement may be strikingly 
shown by the limitation which the fall-board imposes upon the 
forward arm-shift. The question affects our analysis inasmuch as it 
may lead to wrong inferences from the study of the lines of move- 
ment. In many instances the particular form of movement used 
is not the best or most firee— that is to say it is not the best 
co5rdinated movement possible, but is in part definitely determined 
by some extraneous factor, some mechanical point of construction, 
such as the position of the fall-board. This is the vertical board 
immediately behind the keyboard. It is folded back into its vertical 
position when the piano is in use, and is pulled forward over the 
keyboard when the instrument is not in use. The forward movement 
of the hand or arm is, therefore, limited definitely ; whereas the 
backward movement, away from the keyboard toward the body 
of the player, is relatively unlimited. 

The following ascending passage, played in octaves, C-E-filat- 
6-flat-A--U--E-flat-G-fi[at--A is one in which both forward and back- 
ward and lateral shifts are symmetrical with regard to the key- 
board. E-flat is approached from C, as A is approached from 
Gr-flat , the key-relationship C— E-flat—Gr^flat— A is symmetrical to 
that of G-fiiat-A-O-E-flat. The movement of the hand, however, 
in playing this passage rapidly, is not entirely sjmimetrical. In the 
figure here given, Fig. 149, the passage was played in octaves 



Plate XXVI 



iTo face p, zBo 




The Fallboard of a conservatory piano after two years’ use. The scratches show 
the countless impacts of finger-tips and ftUboard, resulting in interference with 
free movement. The lower picture is an enlarged photograph of the section 

marked above. 


{To face p, 281 




mSCELLAJNEOUS MOVEMENTS 281 

ascendingly, allegro, and at moderate intensity. Tke curve illus- 
trates tlie movement of the centre of the hand. As the hand 
passes from C through E-flat to G-flat, its forward motion is 
muscularly inhibited so as to avoid contact of the non-used fingers 
with the fall-board. But when the hand passes from A to C, there 
is no need of this inhibition, hence the hand continues in the 
general direction away from the keyboard and turns about 
midway between A and C. This loop is clearly shown between 
the letters in the figure. If it were not for the fall-board, the curve 
would take a form approximately like that indicated by the dotted 
lines. That is in keeping with the principle of physiological move- 
ment deduced in the chapter on Lateral Arm-Movement ; that a 
change in direction is made gradually whenever possible, avoiding 
angles and substituting curves. 

This limitation or flattening of the curve is not the result of the 
particular technical passage used. It exists in all movements 
involving a forward shift of the hand. Instances will be found 
in Fig. 160 which records the movement of an ascending E-major 
scale, played allegro, in octaves, with first and fifth fingers through- 
out ; also in Figs. 158, 161, 211, 212, 213, and 217. Figs. 211 and 
212 show the left hand octave passage in* Chopin’s A-flat Polonaise ; 
and Fig. 158 shows flatness of the inner half of the ellipses illus- 
trating the opening measures, right hand, of Chopin’s Etude in 
F Major, Op. 26, No, 3. It shows also in all elliptical motions 
involving black keys (such as that in the Chopin Harp Etude, 
Op. 25, No. 1) where it results in a flatness of the ellipse on the side 
near the fall-board. In the scale passage. Fig. 150, if played freely, 
the curve between F-sharp and G-sharp should be an approximate 
symmetrical curve to that between A and B in the same figure. In 
all the figures just mentioned the line of movement is that of the 
middle of the hand. The piano manufacturers could readily remove 
this limitation by dropping back the fall-board a few inches, a 
change which would not interfere seriously with any other point 
of construction, but which would make the playing of octaves or 
mixed figures on black keys considerably less constrained. A glance 
at the fall-board of any used piano will show innumerable arcs and 
scratches where the finger-nails of the player have come into un- 
avoidable contact with the board. See Plate XXVII. This in itself 
is sufficient cause for dropping back the fall-board. Thus the 
asymmetry of physiological movements in opposite directions, which 
I have pointed out for lateral horizontal movements, exists in a 
modified form for the forward and backward movements also. The 
change from a forward to a backward arm-shift is made differently 



282 TOUCH-FOJSmS OP PIAlfO TECHNIQUE 

from the reverse change. The angular aspect of the inner comers 
(near the fall-board) demands a muscular coordination of greater 
strength and brevity than the more curvilinear outer portion of the 
figures. There is greater inhibition in the checking of a forward 
movement, and a great amount of inhibition is normally opposed 
to a well-coordinated movement, the intensity of which does not 
demand the excessive inhibition, fey removing the fall-board, or 
placing it a few inches back, the arm could move in a more 
curvilinear form. I pass the suggestion on to the manufacturers. 


Intensity Effects. 

In earlier discussions of various movements, especially the lateral 
arm-shift, the effect of intensity showed in variations in vertical 
displacement. I add a figure to show that it does not noticeably 
influence the movement in the horizontal plane. Fig. 161 gives the 
curve for C, E-flat, G-flat, A, C, E-flat, G-flat, A, the same as that 
in Fig. 149, but played, this time, ff. The curves of the two figures 
are essentially alike ; with a possible intensity effect reflected in 
the slightly harper comers of the second figure, corresponding to 
the percussion of the black keys E-flat and G-flat. This is a natural 
correlation, since with the increased speed necessary, the force of 
the moving body increases and greater muscular fixation is needed 
to change the direction. The spread of fixation is shown in the 
sharper comers. 

Coordination and Incoordination. 

In movements requiring a shift of the hand before the original 
figure is repeated, the shift is accompanied by an added coordina- 
tion that affects the fingering or the playing of the subsequent 
figure. From a mechanical standpoint it would be advisable to 
have hand and fingers in the same position for each repetition of 
a figure. An example of such repetition is found in the treble 
passage, right-hand, from Liszt’s Lorelei, illustrated in Fig. 162. 
The passage is frequently played by pupils — ^probably on account 
of slow practice — ^by passing over the fourth finger in a legato 
manner, the distance being covered by turning out the elbow also. 
As a result the hand and fore-arm, as G is played, are in a poor 
position for playing the figure at its lower pitch. A quick jerking-in 
of the elbow is necessary to bring the thumb over the next key 
(A-sharp) that it plays. But angularity of movement is normally 
opposed to coordination, and, as a matter of fact, the tonal produc- 
tion suffers somewhat when the passage is played as here described. 
The defect is clearly shown if we record the course of movement 



Fig. 152. Effect of fingering and arm-shift upon the smoothness of a technical movement. 


[To face p. 382 





mSCELLAOTIOUS MOVEMENTS 


283 


of the centre of the hand, as in Fig. 152, where the curve for the 
first presentation of the passage, at A, is more irregular and points 
to an incoordinated movement ; that at B (the same keys as in the 
first part) is the typical, smooth, free curve. 

Suppose now, that the movement is made by a rapid shift of 
the arm without abduction at the wrist. A fingered-legato between 
A-sharp, first finger, and G, fourth finger, will then, of course, be 
impossible. But, apart from the fact that the pedal may be used 
to secure the legato, the speed at which the passage is played 
makes the non-legato leap from A-sharp, thumb, to G, fourth 
finger, not too noticeable. At the same time, the hand is at once 
in the same position to play the second part of the figure as it was 
to play the fcst part. Accordingly, we may expect a better curve 
than before, since the movement is less angiilar. In Fig. 162 B the 
irregularities of Fig. 152 A are absent and the second part of the 
curve (left side) becomes muscularly as well as tonally a repetition 
of the first. When the problem is not complicated by questions of 
accent or duration, this type of curve is to be preferred to that of 
Fig. 162 A, in which similar tonal figures are played by dissimilar 
movements. 

An additional difference may be seen in the forward projections 
of the two curves over the keyboard. In Fig. 162 A, the hand is 
closer to the faU-board (farther over the keys) than in Fig. 162 B. 
Whereas, in the free movement the hand plays its thumb on its 
inward path, in the incoordinated movement more angularity is 
present, shown at the irregular bright section joining the two curves. 
The same section forms a small graceful loop in the coordinated 
movement. 

This is a concrete example in which the slow type of practice 
shown will never lead to a proper execution. Instead, the legato 
character should be somewhat sacrificed in the slow practice and 
'the hand transferred as in Fig. 152 B, instead of changing the arm- 
movement to retain the legato. It illustrates, once again, the 
effect of speed upon muscular coordination and the impossibility 
of transferring a movement learned slowly to the same passage 
played rapidly, without muscular readjustment. 

We may write, as a general principle : the repetition of a figure, 
should, so far as possible, be accompanied by a repetition in the 
position of the hand and arm and in the muscular coordination. 
So far as the application of this principle to figures such as that of 
Fig. 152 is concerned, it is better to sacrifice the finger-legato at 
the point of arm-shift than to introduce a lateral twist (abduction) 
at the wrist. This covers the entire field of arpeggiated passages 



284 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

of sufiB-cient extent to include arm-shift, and illustrates again the 
fact that rapid arpeggios are necessarily played non-legato. 

If these observations are correct, the records obtained from 
technically untalented pupils shonld show marked variations in 
the geometric aspects of the movements from those of talented 
pianists, both as to form and as to angularity. The records which 
foUow are those of an adult beginner, after one year of intensive 
training. It is a case of undoubted subnormal muscular coordina- 
tion, which no amount of training will materially improve. Fig. 

- 163a illustrates the right-hand movement in a slow descending 
C major arpeggio. The curve does not fit either the slow or rapid 
type at all. The slow type of discontinuous movement would 
record bright spots connected by faint lines, as in Fig. 145 : the 
typical “preparation” curve. Furthermore, all curves of well- 
coordinated movements are relatively free from angles, unless the 
direction is changed at the moment of key-impact, which is not the 
case here. That the movement of Fig. 153a was fairly continuous 
is shown by the relative absence of noticeable bright spots. Yet, 
in spite of this continuity, the line is irregular, the second octave 
varying from the first and the variations within each octave being 
likewise irregular.- The line shown in the figure is the typical result 
of a highly-incoordinated, awkward movement. Since the move- 
ment was made very slowly, speed cannot have been a determinant 
of the curve. 

If speed is insisted upon, in the case of subnormal coordination, 
it results in a loss of accuracy, both as to keys struck and dynanoics. 
Fig. 1536 is the hand-curve for a rapid, ascending C major arpeggio, 
in which less than half the proper keys were struck, the third octave 
being an undecipherable jumble of sounds. This part is shown 
in the irregular ending at the right side of the figure. For the 
first two octaves there is a recurrence of curve, but by comparing 
this with the well-coordinated ascending arpeggio curves, shown in 
Figs. 136 and 137, a marked and important difference comes to 
light. In Fig. 1636 the hand was transferred as a unit without 
any thumb-action whatever, with the wrist held noticeably in, 
as opposed to the “ out ” position of the coordinated movement. 
Of the two, the former demands a somewhat easier finger-movement, 
eq)eciaUy thumb-movement. It is a less complex movement, 
h^ce is natural to the incoordiaated response. In agreement 
with the principle of fixation stated in the chapter on Coordination 
and lacoordmation, the wrist is held in and is neither fl.exed nor 
abducted during the movement. The differences between the 
coordinated and this incoordinated arpeggio movement are thus 



Fig- 155 



Fig- 154 

Fig. 153 and Fig. 154. Incoordinated movements. Note irregulatities of curves. 


[To face p. 284 





MISCELLANEOUS MOVEMENTS 285 

seen to be .differences in tie degree of activity of the finer muscles 
of hand and fingers. Through two octaves at least, the curve 
shows a normal freedom and continuity, being, with one exception 
and that a necessary one, free from irregular angularity. The fact 
that the curve itself does not fit the arpeggio does not alter the fact 
that the larger arm-movement was normally made. Had the finer 
finger- and wrist-movements been properly superimposed upon 
this arm-movement, the arpeggio would have been satisfactory. 
As a matter of fact, in the particular case here recorded the chief 
difficulty had always been in coordinated finger-movements, and 
a careful analysis of the case has brought to light a marked sub- 
normality of the finer adjustments of the kinesthetic sense, both as 
to adaptation and retention. Other records made bear out these 
observations. The awkwardness of an incoordinated piano move- 
ment is usually not in the fundamental arm-movements, but in 
the finer or smaller finger- and hand-movements which must 
accompany the arm-movement in all complex figures. Separate 
these components, and much of the awkwardness vanishes. That 
is to say, the fact that the pupil may execute successively each part 
of a complex movement correctly or smoothly, is not proof that he 
can do so simultaneously. And the converse of thus, the view 
generally held by leading pedagogues: that the question is 
primarily one of coordination, a psychological problem, is, partly 
at least, substantiated by experimental evidence such as that 
given in the preceding paragraphs. This in no way eliminates 
the purely physiological variations. The latter, when present, 
affect even the fundamental movements and hence must also affect 
the complex movements. 

In our study of relaxation and of coordination the presence of 
relaxation periods immediately after tone-production was pointed 
out. The curve for very slow lateral arm-shift, for example, 
showed a horizontal transfer to the next playing-position, then 
a rest at that point (the equivalent of relaxation) and finally the 
lift and drop necessary for tone-production. This typical curve 
is shown in Fig. 154. A lateral arm-shift of one octave made by 
a pupil with subnormal technique, at a slow tempo and at an 
intensity approximately jf, is recorded in Fig. 164 A, and a similar 
movement, very slow, but this time mjp, is seen in Fig. 154 B. 
The typical loop-form of the rapid curve analysed in Chapter XIII 
is retained, whereas in the coordinated movement the slow transfer 
takes the form of Fig. 66, a, 6, c. That means that the relaxation 
periods between tone-production are absent. Instead, the entire 
arm is slowly transferred to its new position at a relatively uniform 



286 TOUCH-FOKMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

speed. The mechanical waste of this procedure is given in detail 
on page 104 in connexion with the explanation of the initial maximal 
muscular contraction. That holds for both extremes of intensity. 
Even in the production of a soft tone (Fig. 154 B) the arm is trans- 
ferred in this constrained manner. 

On the other hand, the effect of intensity is the same in these 
records as in those of coordinated movements ; an increase in tonal 
intensity is accompanied by an increase in the amplitude of the 
movement, the difference in the heights of the two curves we are 
considering leaving no doubt as to this correlation. The subject 
TnaVing these records had not practised the movement to any extent. 
As a matter of fact, the first strokes showed the difference in 
amphtude. Accordingly, it seems that gross control of tonal 
intensity is a natural muscular coordination in the adult. It 
does not have to be acquired through prolonged practice. The 
question has its ramifications into the field of pedagogy since it 
helps to estabhsh the time at which problems of intensity and the 
correlated problems of tonal balance should be introduced into 
the training of the child. If, as the records here show, an increase 
in amplitude accompanies an increase in tone without preliminary 
training, as a natural muscular reaction, this difference in amplitude 
may be utilized quite early in the training of the child to secure the 
dynamic effects of melody and accompaniment. As a matter of 
fact, many teachers use precisely this method. The hand playing 
the accompaniment is lifted as httle as possible, while the lift of 
that playing the melody is purposely exaggerated, either into an 
arm portamento or into an arm-legato. All the records I took of 
this phase, as well as observations of pupils, support the theory 
that amplitude of movement and tonal intensity are a basic correla- 
tion, present in early childhood. 

. And consequently, questions of tonal balance are best approached 
in compositions permitting the exaggerated differences in amplitude 
to which I have just referred. The portamento and the arm-legato 
thus gain in value as the early touch-forms in the training of the 
child. The same condition holds for dynamic differences among 
the smaller movements of the fingers, made necessary as the child 
advances. Here, too, the approach is easiest by exaggerating 
the finger-lift in the accented finger, and mini Tnizmg it in the 
unaccented, finger. For, if we are dealing with a fundamental 
form of muscular and sensorial reaction, this will hold for the 
movements of fingers md of hand as well as for movements of 
the arm. 

An additional record of incoordinated chromatic octaves, right 



Plate XXX 



Fig* 155 



Fig. 156 

Chromatic octaves, allegro moderato ; Fig. 155, incoordinated. Fig. 156, coordinated. 



Fig. 157. Lateral arm-shift, octave, incoGrdinated. 


I ’Vo face p, 386 







MISCELLANEOUS MOVEMENTS 287 

hand, ascending through one octave, fairly rapidly, is given in 
Eig. 155. Comparison with the records of similar, but coordinated 
movements, Fig. 156, shows the incoordinated movement to contain 
the greater number of convex arcs, which originate at the player’s 
shoulder. Beneath the curvdB I have dotted in diagramatically, the 
approximate path which the hand describes when the movement 
is made without the aid of wrist-abduction, with forward and back- 
ward movement of the upper arm accompanied by slight extension 
of the elbow. The two curves are very similar. Li the actual 
record a very small amount of wrist abduction is noticeable at 
the beginning of each forward-stroke where the curve is slightly 
looped or bent. But compared to that shown in Fig. 1 56 the amount 
is negligible. Here, as in the curves given for the arpeggio and 
the lateral arm-transfer, we find movement primarily restricted to 
the larger joints. The building up of smaller hand and finger 
movements on these larger movements is conspicuously absent. 
The forward and backward arm-movement is excessive. (Compare 
with Fig. 156.) The subject making the record of Fig. 155 has both 
short fingers and a short thumb. As a result, the projection of 
the hand is farther over the keyboard than that of a normal adult 
hand (Fig. 156). Such differences as these point out, quite clearly, 
the effect of physiological structure upon pianistic movement, 
and emphasize the need for adapting the particular movement 
to the particular hand. 

Fig. 156 a, 6, shows the hand-movement, right hand, top view, 
in chromatic octaves played non-staccato and allegro, a with thumb 
and fifth finger used for all keys, h with the fourth linger on black 
keys. The effect of this change of fingering on the forward or 
backward hand and arm-movement is scarcely noticeable ; . it 
shows itself in the slightly smoother line of forward movement. 
The curves show again the typ)ical muscular asymmetry of 
mechanically symmetrical movements ; in each case the forward 
motion of the hand is diverted more or less abruptly near the middle 
of the stroke, whereas the return stroke is a straight line. 
Mechanically the keyboard demands the same line for both move- 
ments. The asymmetry here is explained by the fact that the 
player, after passing from a white to a black key, lifts the wrist 
(action and reaction) and thus moves the centre of the hand slightly 
forward ; whereas the passage from a black to a white key is more 
in the nature of a glide, in which there is no additional wrist flexion 
or extension. The depression of the black key does not begin at 
the apex of the forward movement, the point marked 0, but at 
d, the passage from d to c resulting from an ascending wrist and 



288 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

some inertia. The loops at e and e' show the typical inertia pro- 
jection : the tendency of the movement to continue in a straight 
line, beyond the points where the keys are struck, /. If two black 
keys were played in succession, we should get no such loop, because 
the fall-board of the piano would prevent it. (See Fig. 150, repre- 
senting the E major scale.) 

When speed is demanded from an untalented pupil, either or both 
of two thmgs may take place : the gross movement, or the aim, is 
incorrect, or both are incorrect. In the arpeggio already studied, 
both aim and movement were wrong, the fundamental movement, 
however, being much more finely coordinated than the movements 
of hand and fingers. This belief is borne out by the record of a 
rapid lateral arm-shift in which separate hand- and finger-movements 
are absent. Fig. 157 reveals the typical correct loop-curve but a 
decided loss in accuracy, which, if it had been perfect, would have 
brought each end of the curve to a point, whereas it is now dispersed 
over a distance corresponding to three piano-keys. (Comparison 
with the coordinated shifts in Chapter XIII will make this clear.) 
The amplitude of the curve points to tones of great intensity. 
This intensity resulted in spite of the fact that the subject making 
the record had been repeatedly told that speed was the only demand, 
and that a light stroke would facilitate speed. However, the 
operation of the principle of incoordination, analysed under Force 
Effects, Chapter IX, resulted in a complete reversion to tjrpe, 
according to which excess muscular contraction accompanied 
all attempts at speed. A similar excess in amplitude is seen in 
the record of the chromatic octaves. Fig. 155, in which the forward 
and backward arm-shift is almost double that of the coordinated 
movement. Fig. 156. The records for tapping. Fig. 96, furnish 
perhaps the most convincing proof of this correlation between 
slow speed and great amplitude in the inco5rdmated movements. 

The use of the word incoordinated, in this sense, needs some 
defense. That speed and amplitude are correlated is a natural 
result of the principle of mechanics underlying movement. Any 
increase in speed, other things equal, means an increase in force, 
because the latter is equal to the product of the mass and the 
acceleration. The increase in muscular contraction which accom- 
panies the attempt at speed thus becomes a coordinated reaction. 
But when it spreads to muscles that do not contribute to the 
movement it becomes incoordinated. In the lateral arm-shift of 
an octave, elbow-flexion and extension plus humerus rotation 
can readily take care of the horizontal displacement and wrist- 
flexion and extension of the vertical displacement. The pectoralis 



MISCELLAI?EOUS MOVEMENTS 289 

major, controlling upper arm depression is not needed. Wlien, as 
in the incoordinated movement, the entire arm is used, the 
momentum to be overcome at each end of the stroke is that much 
greater, hence demands an excess of muscular contraction to 
neutralize it. Tliat is why all fast, very loud passages with change 
of direction can be played only with excess rigidity. Eelaxed 
movement is there entirely out of the question. 

But speed and lightness demand a bgher degree of coordination 
than speed with force. The latter is usually restricted to one joint, 
the joints intervening between it and the point of tone-production 
being held fixed, lie untalented pupil, therefore, naturally uses 
the latter. And, since the larger muscles are physiologically 
associated with forceful movements, such a pupil brings the larger 
parts of the arm or body into play, and never the smaller. Large 
muscles are naturally located more centrally in regard to the trunk, 
than small muscles ; or, the larger the muscles used, the greater 
is the distance from the joint at which motion occurs to the finger- 
tip, the point at which tone is produced. Consequently, the greater 
is the mass to be moved. Such a mechanism is at a considerable 
disadvantage when rapid changes of direction are needed, primarily 
on account of the momentum, which increases with each increase 
in mass. Moreover, where lightness is desired, the touch-form 
just described is useless. No mechamsm in which the mass is 
great is adapted either to rapid changes in direction or to lightness. 

This brings up again the question of gaining the same force 
by appropriate contraction of snoaller muscles lying closer to the end 
of the finger. Granting that sufficient force could be secured, 
this would act upon a body of relatively small mass, hence inertia and 
momentum would be less, and a change of direction could be more 
readily made. Instances are found in the greater ease of hand- 
staccato for rapid, light, detached octaves, when compared with 
arm-staccato — or in the ease of finger-action, compared with hand- 
movement. The player whose finger and hand muscles are strong 
enough to give considerable dynamic range has an advantage over 
the player who uses his upper-arm muscles for similar dynamic 
effects, inasmuch as the speed of movement is not retarded by the 
larger mass of the moving part or parts. So long as the direction 
of motion does not demand rapid changeSj this advantage is less 
helpful, but for movements requiring rapid changes of toection, 
minimal mass of the playing parts is essential. The purely 
gymnastic training of the small muscles of the fingers, hand, and 
fore-arm, in order to increase their absolute strength, is, therefore, 
from a mechanical standpoint, highly desirable for piano technique. 



290 TOUCH-I^OEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

For all light work, and all speed work, light or heavy, requiring 
rapid changes in the direction of motion, the momenturfi of the 
moving parts should be as small as possible. This means that 
the smaller parts of the arm, rather than the larger parts, should 
make the movement. 

This, of course, is not to be understood as a return to the pure 
finger-technique of fifty years ago. The use of the upper arm 
and of the shoulder muscles is at times both advisable and even 
necessary. But in recent years the pendulum has swung too far 
in the direction of weight technique, which, incidentally, someone 
has, quite aptly, labelled the “ wait technique I have already 
pointed out the mechanical impossibility of using weight technique 
in any figure involving rapid movement-repetition, and in the 
chapter on Tone Qualities, its interference with all brilliance will 
be shown. These two phases alone should suj06.ce to put us on our 
guard against the indiscriminate application of weight. “Where 
slow speed and slow changes of direction permit its use, tone- 
production with the relaxed arm, in proportion to the d3niamic 
degree, is to be preferred, both on account of the improvement 
in tonal quality (the noise-elements being largely absent) and on 
account of the principle of mechanical economy, there being- a 
minimum of wasted energy. On the other hand, where speed 
and lightness, particularly speed and force are simultaneously 
required, there can be no talk of weight-technique or of relaxed arm. 
Isolation, instead of being aim and end of training, is just the 
opposite : a typical characteristic of incoordinated movement. 
“V^en we have movement restricted to a single joint we have 
relative isolation. But in all the records given for coordinated 
movement, pure circular movements (the geometric projection of 
movement at a single joint) are conspicuously absent, whereas 
they are more noticeably present m the examples of incoordinated 
movement. And these centres of movement have primarily to do 
with the larger muscles, gross movement, and slow speed. 

Fig. 158, which shows the curve of the centre of the hand for the 
first four measures of the Chopin Etude in F Major, Op. 26, No. 3, 
illustrates, once again, the substitution of the rotary motion for 
the angular. In this passage no stretch of more than an octave is 
found for any one beat. Th.e movement, therefore, could readily 
be made without the rotation so far as stretch is concerned. The 
points marked w, m, represent the movement corresponding to the 
second beat in the first and second measures ; o, the last beat of 
measure three ; p, the last beat of measure four. The motion 
thus becomes elliptical and, as such, is a continuous movement 





Plate XXXI 


Allegro. (Jaitoj 



Fig. 159, Complexity of arm-movement. 


\To face p, 890 




MISCELLANEOUS MOVEMENTS 291 

of the fore-arm and upper-arm, upon which the smaller movements 
of the fingers take place, without however, bringing the arm move- 
ment to a stop. 'Bhis is in direct opposition to the type of move- 
ment which would move the hand and fore-arm to their positions 
exactly above the keys to be played. The absence of bright points 
of light in the photograph shows clearly that the speed of hand- 
movement has been but little retarded while the keys were actually 
depressed. Experiment has proved that, for a pupil possessing 
enough technique to warrant Ids approach to a piece of such 
diB&culty, the movement shown can be made very comfortably 
at a much slower tempo than that prescribed. Practice may, 
therefore, begm immediately with the free-arm movement, as a 
result of which the learning process may be facilitated, the readjust- 
ments necessitated by incorrect early movements eliminated, and 
the practice time shortened. The objection that such movements 
are readily observed by the pupil or are explained by the teacher, 
is not true ; the average pupil finds it quite difficult to observe 
the finer adjustments in a rapid movement, and the average 
teacher of advanced piano, unfortunately, seldom analyses 
sufficiently to know how or why he does a thing. Moreover, when 
he plays the passage slowly, his highly developed coordination, 
working on the principle of biological economy, adapts the move- 
ment to the slow speed and thus makes observation useless, by 
changing the nature of the movement. 

I do not maintain that by simply keeping the geometries of the 
movement the same, we likewise keep the mechanics the same. 
This is mechanically and physiologically impossible. What I 
believe is that the registration in the nervous system of a slow 
movement the geometries of which are to be retained, may be a gain 
in pedagogical economy. 

Fig. 159 illustrates the hand-movement in the given passage 
from the A minor Etude of Chopin, Op. 25, No. 11, measures 47 
and 48 of the Allegro con brio. It brings to light, among other 
things, a noticeable forward and backward shift, which, inciden- 
tally, is present in all complicated passages, to an extent out of all 
proportion to the pedagogical attention such a movement has 
received. A glance at the other figures in this chapter will reveal 
this importance. For the sake of clearness, I have lettered a few 
points in the curve corresponding to similar points m the notation. 
From m over n, o, y, to q we have the typical arpeggio curve, 
modified somewhat by the mixed character of the particular figure. 
The forward shift to r was made to accommodate the thumb on 
F-sharp, that at s, similarly for B-flat. The many mixed curves, 



292 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

in passing from r to 5 show a fore-arm rotation, a tremolo, in the 
playing of the second measure. Various features of the curve show 
the non-legato character of most of the figures. Thus the descend- 
ing curve from otoj> and q is very similar to the well-coordinated 
movement of the cadenza from Liszt’s Lorelei, given in Fig. 152, 
which was a non-legato technique. Without this non-legato the 
above passage from Chopin becomes extremely difi&cult and results, 
at best, in an awkward performance. 

When we realize that the camera has here caught only displace- 
ments in the two directions of the horizontal plane : lateral and 
forward— backward, and that to these, in the actual playing are 
added vertical displacements and many finger-actions, we can get 
some concept of the enormous complexity of the movements made 
in piano-playing. The relative absence of bright light-points in 
the curve corresponding to the arpeggio again shows that the hand 
was not held quietly until one figure had been played, and then 
shifted into the next octave, but that the lateral sldft, combined 
with a forward and backward shift and, normally with some wrist 
motion, was going on steadily while the fingers were executing their 
own movements. Otherwise, bright points, as they are seen to some 
extent in the latter part of the curve, would be present. It is 
entirely possible to play the first figure with a quiet hand and thus 
avoid the forward shift beguming at, and returning to m ; but 
this is not the manner in which the accomplished pianist plays the 
passage, although the excessive shift here recorded may result in 
part from the rather short thumb of the pianist who made the 
record. As before, the characteristics of this movement are non- 
legato and continuity ; simultaneously with a relatively slow and 
faidy steady shift of the larger parts of the arm, the hand and the 
more rapid finger-movements take place. Mechanically the process 
is similar to the movements of a compound pendulum, the first 
bob of which moves in the simple pendular curve while the last bob 
may be moving in very complex curves. 

Li Fig. 160 is given the hand-movement for the last cadenza 
in the ^opin-Liszt Chant Polonaise: '"Mes Joies.” The entire 
passage could be played with a quiet hand, but the curve made shows 
a noticeable amount of forward and backward arm-movement. 
Even the mixed trill, with which the cadenza begins was, in this 
case, played with a shifting hand, else the bright spot at the 
b ^innin g of the passage would be little more than a point. The 
slight forward shift at a accompanies the pla 3 dng of the black keys, 
B-flat and A-flat. The more noticeable shift at 6 is caused by the 
A-flat in the next group, and the wide forward shift at o, by the use 





Plate XXXIH 



[jTo face #>. *93 



MISCELLANEOUS MOVEMENTS 


293 


of the thumb on B-flat. These movements are then repeated in 
the next octave at points d, e, /. The ascending curve is much 
smoother, because the chromatic thirds are uniformly • spaced. 
But even here, a forward shift of approximately one and one-half 
inches is present. The chromatic thirds may be conveniently 
played with a quiet hand but were not so done in this record. 
The movement was not restricted to finger-action plus a straight 
lateral shift of the arm, but the differences in black and white keys 
resulted in a forward and backward shift of the arm, as well. This, 
naturally, is much more marked in the descending part of the 
figure than in the ascending ; the chromatic thirds in the latter 
being entirely regular in their distance relationships. The slight 
forward and backward movements result from a slight raising 
and lowering of the wrist ; the small loop effects result from a lateral 
twist of the wrist necessary in double-note (and similar) passages 
to facilitate the legato. So that even in a passage that could be 
played with a quiet hand, we find the pianist using arm, fore-arm, 
and wrist movement as aids to the finger-movement. 

In Pig. 161 the movement for the right hand in the cadenza near 
the end of Liszt’s Tarantella : Venezia e Napoli is given. 

The numbers given correspond to the similar numbers below the 
notes. Significant again is the amount of forward and backward 
shift both in the descending and in the ascending figures. The 
small loops show twistiug of the wrist ; the forward shift, such as 
from 7 to 8. shows raising of the wrist. The total movement, 
therefore, combines arm, fore-arm, wrist, and finger movements 
in all dimensions : vertical, forward-horizontal, and lateral- 
horizontal. The flatness between 13-14, 16-17, 19-20, results 
from the muscular inhibition made to avoid contact with the fall- 
board of the piano. In the descending part of the curve the 
cumulative forward position of the hand-centre (compare 1-2 with 
4-5 and 8-9) was caused by the rise in the wrist, as the right hand 
approached the bass region of the keyboard. The curve is further 
interestmg because it shows that octave transpositions demand 
changes in movement. So far as the notes are concerned, we have 
exact duplications in three octaves; the curve of movement, 
however, shows that the hand must make some adjustments : 
from 1 to 3 is not precisely the same as 4 to 6 ; from 3 to 6 differs 
slightly from 6 to 10. Similar differences will be found for other 
parts of the curve, as well as in the curves of other figures. It is, 
of course, inevitable that this be so, because the position of the 
shoulder changes in relation to the part of the keyboard being used. 
It is the experimental evidence of the fact already stated, namely ; 



294 TOUOH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

that in any pianistic movement of moderate range or more, 
a constant shift of muscular coordination occurs which does not 
parallel exactly the notation or keyboard spacing of the figure. 
Hie A-flat chord is triplicated in the notation, but the muscular 
coordination responsible for the playing of the last (highest) octave 
diSers quite noticeably from that responsible for that of the first 
(lowest) octave. This is inevitable in view of the extended range 
of the passage. 

The foregoing list of miscellaneous movements, fragmentary 
as it is, suJfices, nevertheless, to substantiate the conclusions 
reached in earlier chapters on the various phases of the mechanics 
of piano technique. In each case we find the entire muscular 
system of the arm at work, and in many cases, that of the shoulder 
as well. Any isolation of movement, therefore, must be understood 
as relative. The presence of arm-movement is not the result of 
the particular selections used, because we find the arm-movement 
present in passages the extent of which does not necessitate it. 
But it does not follow on that account that arm-movement is always 
advisable. In some instances it is used (as in single or double 
trills) to aid finger-movement, whereas sufficient drill in the finger- 
movement, granted, of course, sufficient kinesthetic control and 
^eed coefficients, could and would make this aid useless. When 
and where the arm-movement is advisible has been mentioned 
in connection with the various touch-forms and the miscellaneous 
movements we have been analysing. If the older school of pedagogy, 
which insisted upon a rigid arm and quiet hand, erred on the side 
of too little movement, the modem relaxation school errs equally 
on the side of too much movement. Wherever speed and change 
of direction are rapid, reduction of the inertia of the playing-mass 
to a minimum is mechanically desirable. And, conversely, wherever 
tone, tempo, and direction permit weight-transfer, the arm may 
advantageously be used, because it facilitates tone-control and 
reduces the undesirable elements of piano tone-quality — ^the impact- 
noises — to a TniuiTmiTYi . 

On the other hand, the lack of isolation mentioned in the preceding 
paragraph, must not be interpreted as an uncontrolled shifting 
of muscular activity. In repeated movements it is mechanically 
desirable to repeat the coordination responsible for the movement. 
This, however, does not mean isolation of muscular activity ; 
although it may well mean isolation of visual movement. It is 
not a mere coincidence that, in the many records made, the accuracy 
with which the moving parts retraced their paths in repeated 



MISCELLANEOUS MOVEMENTS 


295 


passages, paralleled, very closely, the so-called technical finish 
of the player. (See Figs. 211 and 212.) Poor technique was 
indicated in deviations from the path. Often these deviations 
were minute, and were not tonally noticed as deviations. Yet 
their frequent occurrence is one determinant of individual style, 
and helps to accoimt for some of the differences noticed in the 
playing of one composition by various pianists. An interesting 
instance of the effect of movement-type upon technical and tonal 
value w'as unexpectedly disclosed in the recording of violin move- 
ments, A rapidly repeated passage was reversed, the player finding 
the result rather poor. The curve showed wide deviations instead 
of repetition. With a little practice the tonal result became satis- 
factory — ^and at the same time the curve showed the expected 
accuracy of repetition. This correlation is seen also m many 
of the illustrations already given, and it seems safe to conclude 
that technical accuracy in repeated movements depends upon 
spatial repetition of the movement. From a mechanical stand- 
point this is logical : the same mass moving in the same direction 
and at the same speed will produce exactly the same effect with 
each repetition, ind, although the same effect may be secured 
in various ways or by various movements, the accuracy is often 
impaired when the muscular coordination is changed. The same 
weight “ feels ” quite different if lifted first with the finger alone, 
then with the hand, and finally with the arm. Where the passage 
demands exact repetition, it should be played, so far as possible 
with exact movement-repetition, which, in turn, means repetition 
of the muscular coordination underlying the movement. Instances 
are found in trills and arpeggios, and many scales, more specifically 
in parts of such works as Beethoven’s Waldstein Sonata, Liszt’s 
Waldesrauschen, Eavel’s Ondine, or Chopin’s Berceuse, in short 
in all figures used primarily for colour and not for rh 3 rthmic or 
melodic effects. 

Such examples occur frequently, it is true, yet they are far less 
frequent than passages in which melodic and rhythmic demands 
obscure and modify exact repetition. This fact has led a prominent 
pianist, upon his being asked to play an absolutely even scale, to 
reply: ‘^I have never played one.” And certainly, in piano 
literature dynamically and agogicaUy inflected passages are many 
times more frequent than uniofiected passages. In preceding 
chapters I have attempted to show that each such inflection 
necessarily involves a shift in muscular coordination. The records 
of this chapter show such variations for each complex movement. 
Accordingly, in actual advanced playing — ^and, to a less extent 



296 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

in elementary work — coordination is opposed to isolation, unless 
the latter be imderstood in so relative a way as to destroy 
tke meaniag of the word. If the movement involve any shift of 
the hand, or even of the thumb, or if it contain any crescendo, 
diminuendo, accellerando, or ritard, it will require a shift in the 
muscular adjustment, and only if the entire passage with its dynamic 
and agogic inflections be repeated, will the entire muscular co5rdina- 
tion be repeated. 

Li piano pedagogy, attention should be directed to both finger- 
action and arm-movement. Finger-action with quiet hand is 
just as necessary for the perfect execution of certain passages, as 
the addition of hand- and arm-movement to this action is necessary 
for other passages. The older school of pedagogy did not 
countenance the latter at all ; the modem relaxation and weight 
schools have failed to give the non-weighted finger- and hand- 
technique its proper important place. 



CHAPTER XXI 

Individual Differences : General 

Thus far the analysis of the physiological mechanics of piano 
technique was directed toward establishing the general laws upon 
which such movements are based. The conclusions drawn from 
the investigations of the various problems, both mechanical and 
physiological, hold for any non-pathological case. But the 
problems of the piano teacher are not only general problems, they 
are also, and preponderantly so, specific problems. And against 
the physiological constancy set up in preceding chapters, we have 
now to place the physiological variability that gives rise to the 
important question of individual differences. Musical talent would 
have no intelligent meaning were it not for this variability, which 
reaches into the finest fibres of man’s nature. It is responsible 
for the difference between John Smith and Paderewski, between 
ein Bauer and Harold Bauer. 

As complex and subtle as individual differences in musical talent 
are — ^and ten years of experimental work in the analysis thereof 
have not lessened my appreciation of either their complexity or 
their subtlety — ^these differences, nevertheless, begin in the varia- 
tions of the gross physiological organism : the size of the hand, 
length of the fingers or arm, weight of the arm, and range of move- 
ments. A detailed treatment of individual differences is impossible 
here — ^the question demands a comprehensive investigation as 
a separate problem. But an analysis of some of the important 
features thereof is necessary to show how the general principles 
deduced in earlier chapters cover the range of individual variation, 
and also to show how such physiological variations can account 
for the phases of mechanics yet to be discussed under Style. 

With this plan in mind I shall treat, in a very brief way, the 
variations in arm-structure, muscular arrangement, circulatory 
and neural deviations. Then, in a separate chapter, I shall take up 
in a more detailed manner, variations in the hand itself, as being 
of greater direct interest to the piano teacher. 

The Arm. 

In the pedagogy of the relaxation or weight schools of piano- 
playing, the arm-weight is a factor of great importance, since it 
is this weight that is held responsible for tone-production. 

297 



298 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

The force which a falling body exerts (a necessary movement- 
condition if arm-weight is to be efiective) varies with the weight of 
the body and the distance through which it falls. In analysing 
tihie effect of variations in arm-weight upon piano tone it is advisable 
to keep each of these two factors constant, while the other varies. 
The adult arm-weight, as common observation shows, varies con- 
siderably. Among my own pupils (excluding children) I have 
found a range between six and fourteen pounds, or 233®/^, when the 
arm is supported immediately above the elbow. We have this 
wide range as one determinant of tonal intensity, a range sufficient 
to embrace several of the usual dynamic degrees. 

The force of free arm-drop is considerably more than that 
needed for normal tone-production. But it shows a variation that 
is responsible for wide differences in tonal intensity. In other 
words, the production of a tone of a given intensity by an arm 
weighing six pounds requires a different muscular setting than that 
of a twelve pound arm. And, conversely, similar arm-conditions 
in such a case will result in noticeably dissimilar tonal intensities. 

In support of the assertion that individual differences in arm- 
weight are an important factor in determining the easiest method 
of tone-control, see Fig. 162, which shows five arm-types : a is the 
arm of a relatively slender girl of thirteen ; b that of a male adult ; 
c that of a female adult ; d that of a girl of nineteen ; e that of a boy 
of nineteen. A glance at the pictures will show, better than words; 

• the great variations in tone produced by arm-weight. The arms 
shown vary in weight from eight to fourteen pounds and in length 
from twenty-four to thirty inches. If we include a child’s arm, 
the weight-difference will be still greater. 

So far as arm-weight is concerned in tone-production, therefore, 
we may logically expect considerable individual variations in tone. 
If arm 6, Fig. 162, is used for a given tonal intensity, arm e 
will produce a tone much louder. To produce the same tonal 
intensity either arm b will have to add muscular contraction to 
arm-weight, or arm e will have to restrict arm-weight by an opposite 
muscular contraction. This dependence of tonal intensity upon 
arm-weight, it seems to me, must be considered by a teacher who 
demands a uniform tone intensity (for similar phrases, of course) 
from all pupils, whether child or adult, light or heavy. At least 
the fact must be recognized that such uniformity is gained only by 
proportionate differences in muscular adjustment — ^in which case 
we cannot properly speak of arm-weight producing the tone. 

The arm differences are so marked that they are probably 
generally accepted as one tonal determinant. But cannot similar 



Plate XXXIV 



Fig. i6z. Arm-types, showing weight-variations of two hundred per cent. 






INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: GENERAL 299 

hand- or even finger-weight differences account for smaller, less 
obvious, but none the less important, tonal differences ? 

The weight of an adult finger varies approximately between one 
and three ounces. The normal curved-finger stroke is a movement 
of the finger-tip through approximately two inches. Moreover, 
if the free-drop be reenforced by equal muscular contraction, the 
force of the heavier finger will always be greater than that of 
the lighter finger, and the resulting tone louder. In order to produce 
equal tonal intensities with finger-stroke, the lighter finger will 
require more strength of muscular contraction than the former. 
True, the coordination may be shifted and hand-weight used ; 
but in a passage requiring rapid finger-lift or repetition, hand-weight 
is excluded (see Chapter XI) and the tone-production depends 
upon finger strength. It is for this reason that if a child, especially 
with a slender, light hand, is to play rapidly, a light tone is absolutely 
necessary until the muscular strength in the finger muscles has been 
developed. A heavier hand can play at the same speed with greater 
tonal intensity. 

Similar differences are found when arm-, hand-, or finger-length 
is the determining element. The latter is discussed in detail in 
the next chapter. Arm-length, particularly in connection with 
the width and thickness of the trunk, determin es the ease with which 
keys at the extreme region of the keyboard, when the arms are 
crossed, can be reached. Modem piano literature occasionally 
calls for a double glissando, beginning with the hands crossed over 
several octaves. A corpulent, wide-chested player, with short 
arms, may find such crossing in front of the chest quite impossible. 
The adult arms I have measured varied in length between 26 and 
32 inches from arm-pit to finger-tip. The variation here is con- 
siderably less in relation to the modal arm-length than the weight- 
variation, but six inches is a considerable distance — ^approximately 
an octave — on the keyboard. A difference of an inch may mean 
a stretch difference of one key on the piano. In rapid leaps, such 
as the crossing of the hands — ^a typical technical stunt in many 
advanced etudes — even such a difference may be sufficient to 
interfere with the accuracy of the leaps. These, as we have seen 
in the chapter on Lateral Arm-Movement, are made normally 
by a free-travelling arm. Insufficient arm-length may require 
a leaning-over of the trunk, or greater force of throw to overcome 
the flesh, tissue, and skeletal resistance of a broad chest. A narrow- 
chested person, arm-length between 30 and 31 inches, can cross 
the arms simultaneously and cover a keyboard distance of approxi- 
mately 30 inches or five octaves and a fifth or sixth. A stout person 



300 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

has difl&culty in covering four octaves. Again, an arm-length 
of thirty or more inches permits the playing of the keys of the 
highest octave with the hand knuckles parallel to the keyboard, 
the elbow being flexed between 40° and 50° ; and, by leaning the 
body further forward, the angle may be increased to between 70° 
and 80°. The distance to the extremes of the keyboard, from the 
shoulder in an adult (height 5 ft. 10 in.), when seated in erect 
playing position, is about 29 inches, hence a short arm (for example, 
27 inches) cannot even reach the last piano-key without a change 
in trunk position. 

The effects within extreme ranges of the keyboard, though more 
marked, are of less practical importance than those closer to the 
middle range. Here the arm-position and, on account of it, the 
body-position, are frequently determined by arm-length. A long 
arm will require a greater distance between the seat and the key- 
board. I recall a pupil whose arms were excessively long in relation 
to the other anatomical proportions. Only by permitting her to 
sit at what to all appearances was an absurdly great distance from 
the keyboard could I get a horizontal fore-arm in the middle pitch 
region without throwing the elbow too far behind the body. This 
arm-length, coupled with a relatively short leg-length, prevented 
any flexion whatever at the knee when the feet rested on the pedals. 

Neither height of seat, nor its distance from the keyboard, can 
be flxed at any point. They should vary with the proportions 
of the trunk and of the arms. Thus the position of Eachmaninoff 
or Siloti will differ from that of Bauer or Novses (a difference 
readily observed at a concert). 

For teachers of children, anatomical differences are of great 
practical importance. Passages that are entirely impossible 
when fingered as an adult hand would finger them, become quite 
playable with appropriate fingering or division between the hands. 
Sliding with the same finger from black to white keys, division of 
the tones of a chord between the hands, playing of the thumb 
on two adjacent white, or even black keys, are cases in point. Many 
passages in Schumann, for example, which as printed, require 
stretches of a tenth with crossed thumbs, can be played much more 
easily by reversing the thumb notes ; or, as at the beginning of 
Beethoven’s Moonlight Sonata, by substituting 1-3-5, r.li. for the 
usual 2-4-^ given in the standard editions. 

Muscles. 

Individual differences in musculature are found not only in 
the strength of muscles, but also in their exact location, their 



INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: GENERAL 301 

multiplicity of origin or insertion, and even in their complete 
absence. It is by no means beyond the realm of possibility that 
such differences play a part in establishing differences in the funda- 
mental technique of individuals. Let us take, as an example, 
the short flexor of the little finger (flexor brevis minimi digiti). It 
is sometimes entirely absent, in which case the abductor of the same 
finger is somewhat larger than usual. But the movements of 
abduction and flexion are linearly at right angles. With two 
muscles acting, the little finger can be flexed more readily in an 
abducted position (as in extended chord work) than with a single 
muscle controlling both movements. 

As a second illustration, we may take the palmaris hngus, a 
slender muscle lying in the fore-arm. It is relatively often absent. 
Yet its insertion into the central part of the annular ligament 
and its expansion into the fasaia of the palm, gives it a position 
very favourable in wrist flexion, such as that used in staccato 
octaves. Moreover, the insertion of the muscle is such that its 
interference with the action of other hand and finger muscles is 
relatively small, permitting, it would seem, freedom of finger move- 
ment during the flexing movement, a decided asset in many 
piano passages. Sometimes a second muscle parallels the first 
in function, structure, and position. 

A third illustration of the effect of differences in muscular structure 
upon movement is furnished by the common finger flexor. This 
arises from a common source in the fore-arm and divides into four 
tendons. The tendon of the index finger is distinct (this accounts 
for the physiological hand division shown in Fig. 166d), the 
remaining three tendons are coimected by tendonous slips. The 
extent of this connection, however, varies. Where it is limited, 
that is to say, where the tendons separate well above the palm 
of the hand, there is reason to believe that the separate movement 
(flexion) of the third, fourth, and fifth fingers is facilitated. This 
distinction must not be confused with the coordination resulting 
from practice. 

The pronator radii teres ^ a pronatmg muscle m the fore-arm is 
still another muscle that is occasionally absent. Its work is then 
taken over by the other pronating muscles, but obviously at a 
different mechanical efficiency. 

The list could be extended ; what has been given suffices to show 
that individual differences m the mechanics of movement may 
result partly from the muscular and skeletal structure, because 
with each change in the angle of pull and the length of the lever- 
arm (see Mechanical Principles) comes a change in mechanical 



302 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

efiSiciency. Concrete data on tie effect of the details of muscular 
structure upon the finger- and hand-movements are diflB.cult to 
obtain since the X-ray and surgical procedure are respectively 
useless and impossible. But knowing the mechanics of the muscular 
action and the positive variations in musculature, we may safely 
infer that some differences, even if only slight, in the natural capacity 
for coordinated movements, may result from the details of muscular 
structure and position such as we have been considering. 

Strength. 

Closely correlated with this difference, is that in the actual 
strength of muscles. In the case of hand-grip I have found 
variations over a range of a thousand per cent between the ages of 
seven and twenty. Is this to be expected ? Then let us expect 
similar differences in the strength of the smaller finger and hand 
muscles, and allow for them in the production of tone upon a 
mechanically fixed keyboard. When a child produces a singing 
tone on the piano, he does so with a muscular coordination quite 
different from that used by an adult for the same tonal intensity. 
And, conversely, when a cMd restricts movement to a finger-stroke, 
he will produce a tone far different from that produced by an 
adult with the same coordination. Variations in the strength of 
finger-flexion (the movement for tone-production in the piano) 
extend from a few ounces to several pounds. I know of no case 
of adequate piano technique accompanied by finger weakness. 
In fact, I am convinced, after measurements on this phase, as well 
as general observation of pupils, that much of the limitation of 
girl and women players results from an inadequate muscular 
strength, in fingers, hand, and arm. As a concrete example I 
cite the case of a girl of fourteen who, with all the speed and accuracy 
necessary for bravura octaves, cannot take them beyond a moderate 
forte because the fifth finger cannot sustain the force. Careful 
observation through a number of years is showing the entire 
dependence of this phase upon the strength of the flexor of the 
fifSi finger. 

In other words, technical clarity and eflS.ciency are not entirely 
a matter of coordination, but are determined, far more than is 
generally believed, by differences in the strength of the muscles 
involved. The fact that the hands of some pianists are soft to 
the touch, and those of others are firm, is not an index of muscular 
strength. The soft hand can readily result from good relaxation, 
which, we as have seen, is prerequisite to proper coordination. 
Such a hand can at a moment’s notice contract into a firm position, 



INDIVIDUAI. DIFFERENCES: GENERAL 303 

by appropriate muscular contraction. And it can, with equal 
rapidity, relax again. In fact, in this immediate relaxation, after 
the need for fixation is over, we find one important element of 
kinesthetic talent. 

Detailed instances of the effect of finger and arm strength are 
given elsewhere, under finger-stroke, tremolo, vibrato. At this 
point the effect of strength is listed merely as one determinant 
of individual differences. It demands that a tone-production 
be used commensurate with the strength value, if the coordination 
is not seriously to be interfered with. After all, does not the adult 
teacher, when listening to a small pupil play, too often image the 
tone-values he himself would produce, instead of those he would 
have produced at the child’s age ? And then, when the child 
necessarily stiffens in order to meet these demands, does not the 
teacher too often complain about the stiffness ? Or, if the pupil 
adopts the skeletal hand-position shown in Fig. 187, in order to 
transmit the necessary force to the keys, or uses the side of the hand 
to accent a high pitch with the right hand or low pitch with the left- 
hand (see Fig. 166), does not the teacher complain about high- 
wrist or the slant toward the fifth finger, because his own stronger 
hand does not need either position ? 

A few concrete instances will show the practical effect of strength 
variations such as we have been considering. Strong fingers can 
play in flat position and yet produce sufidcient tonal intensity. 
The correlation between flat fingers and extended broken-chord 
figures is discussed in detail under Axpeggio. Weak fingers cannot 
possibly play such figures rapidly and clearly, the intermediate notes 
are almost always skimmed over. Strong fingers are needed for 
all rapid/or^e scales, since arm-weight cannot be transferred beyond 
the five finger limit. (See Chapter XI, under Thumb-Movement.) 
Strong fingers reduce the tendency to stiffen because the insertion 
■of the luwbricales, one of the finger flexors, is in the hand itself, 
hence the tendons of these muscles do not cross the wrist, and, 
accordingly, do not require fixation of this joint to transmit their 
pull. Just as soon as we use arm-weight, this fixation is necessary. 
The dynamic inflection of most triUs., particularly any double 
trill, is entirely dependent upon finger-strength; arm-weight is 
out of the question. (See Trill.) 

As much as I am opposed to mechanical appliances in actual 
piano practice, since I believe the association of the physiological 
movement with the tonal result is absolutely necessary, so much 
am I convinced that the mechanical strengthening of the finger and 
hand muscles through appropriate non-pianistic exercises isnecessary , 



304 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

The piano keyboard, and the essentially percussive nature of piano 
touch, as well as the position and modus operandi of the muscles 
themselves, are not well adapted to a rapid muscular development. 
By a systematic training of jSnger and thumb movements, with 
appropriately controlled resistances, the hand muscles, upon which 
the brilliance in many piano passages depends, can be strengthened 
in a much shorter time. Moreover, the mechanical ” drill at the 
keyboard, with which many pupils waste an enormous amount of 
time, can profitably be detached from tone, so long as its function 
is mechanical. Then, perhaps, keyboard work will be less 
mechanical. 

Pathology. 

Individual differences in movement and in the naturalness of 
various hand-positions, can be studied by an analysis of certain 



pathological conditions. “When the ulnar nerve is injured, 
a paralysis of the muscles in the palm of the hand (lumbricales and 
interrosei) results. The hand assumes a marked claw-like position. 
Fig. 163. The similarity of this position to that in Fig. 16a, the 
typical, ‘‘ broken arch ” position of piano pedagogy, is striking. 
It proves, rather conclusively, that the maintenance of hand-arch 
depends upon the two sets of muscles mentioned. Such a case 
of paralysis is extreme, and the resulting hand-position (it is often 
more marked than Fig. 163 shows), is caused by the pull of the 
extensors, which is then not offset by a puH of the antagonistic 
flexors (see Tonus). But, suppose that a weakness of the muscles 
exists instead of complete paralysis. Then the greater pull of the 
extensors would cause a partial depression or flattening of the arch, 
a tendency characteristic of quite a few pupils. Or reverse the 
supposition, with the flexors as the stronger group. Such a hand 



INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: GENERAL 305 


would find it difficult fully to extend the fingers. As a matter of 
fact, the deterioration of the 'palmaris longus muscle has at times 
resulted in a thickening of the fascia of the palm with permanent 
flexion of the fingers, the condition being known as Dupreytren’s 
Contracture. 

Nm-Pathological Differences. 

Thus the natural hand-position of an individual pupil may be 
partly determined by the balance of pull of the various antagonistic 
muscle groups. The mere maintenance of proper hand-arch by 
pressure upon the piano-key is not sufficient, because the arch 
can be forced up by pushing the elbow toward the keyboard, which 
is the work of the shoulder muscles. Exercises, such as squeezing 
a rubber ball in the hand, illustrate the proper functioning of the 
muscles. Such resistance is not present in the keyboard, and can 
best be applied by mechanical devices. Pressure upward, on the 
under-surface of the fingers, immediately in front of the hand- 
knuckles, is effective in strengthening these muscles. 

Similar conditions may exist in any other group of muscles. 
They account for the fact that pupils of small stature can often 
get marked tonal climaxes upon the piano. I know of a case 
where a girl of ninety pounds played the fortissimo passages of 
Chopin’s F-sharp minor Polonaise at an intensity that would have 
done credit to a person almost twice her weight. True, the fixation 
required resulted in the bursting of a small bloodvessel in the neck; 
a very concrete illustration of the spread of fixation to remote 
parts of the organism. 

Such physiological differences affect piano technique directly. 
In the case of the strength of finger-muscles, they can determine 
the height of finger-lift needed to produce tones of a certain intensity. 
With a range in finger strength of several hundred per cent, the 
requirements of finger-lift are proportionately variable. A finger 
whose flexor muscles are half as strong as those of another finger, 
assuming the masses of the two fingers to be equal, and ignoring 
gravity, will require double the finger-lift, other things equal, 
of the stronger finger. In other words, in order to produce the 
necessary finger velocity the weaker muscle must act through 
a distance twice as great as that required by the stronger muscle. 
Excessive finger-action, or even pronounced action, is opposed 
to smoothness, both on mechanical and physiological grounds. 
It intensifies the percussive element, which interferes with tone- 
control, and it introduces physiological strain, by exceeding the 
mid-range of movement (see p. 32). A sufficiently strong hand 



306 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

can play diatonic passage-work at a fairly good intensity without 
finger-lift, restricting the finger to key-depression. A weak hand 
playing the same way “ blurs ” the passage and plays clearly only 
when a marked finger-stroke is used. Anatomically the hand- 
muscles are adapted far more for speed than for force, as Fig. 18, 
and the angles of pull of Fig. 103 show. Accordingly, their 
strengthening by appropriate exercise is pianistically advisable. 
It is this weakness that probably started the application of arm- 
weight as a substitute. But this can be used only to a limited degree. 
The mechanics of movement point out quite unmistakably the need 
for a strengthening of the smaller finger and hand muscles themselves 
instead of a shift into the larger arm-muscles as prime movers. 

The effect of strength and anatomical build is seen whenever 
we group a sufficient number of individuals to show central 
tendencies. Then it is found that : — 

1. Boys, as a whole, play more loudly than girls. 

2. Strong and heavily built children and adults play more loudly 
than those weak and of light build. 

3. Those tone-qualities associated with pronounced tonal 
intensities, such as brittle, hard, metallic, brilliant, are more 
frequently found in strong players ^an in weak. 

The numerous exceptions which will immediately come to the 
minds of experienced teachers do not invalidate these tendencies. 
Any large unselected group will prove them. 

Two quasi-pathological conditions are met frequently enough to 
warrant their mention here : the snapping of finger or wrist-joints 
and the formation of cysts. The snap is usually not accompanied 
by pain of any kind, but what it lacks in physical pain it often 
contains in mental anguish, especially for those persons who feel 
a violent aversion to the sound. The snap is most often caused by 
the sudden slipping of the head of a bone over the base of another. 
Consequently, file sound is increased if the two bones are pressed 
together with outside aid— the familiar ‘‘ stunt ’’ of persons who 
like to demonstrate their cracking potentialities. Any irregularities 
in the articulating surfaces will result in some noise; and 
considerable play in the joint (the “ double-jointedness ” described 
elsewhere) permits irregidarities in gliding, which in turn may 
produce the snap. ^ ^ 

The cysts are formed by the oozing out of the synovial fluid 
through the sheath of the tendon. Wherever a tendon passes over 
a ligamentous slip or bone, with a change of direction, it normally 
glides within a separate sheath which is lubricated by the synovial 



INDIVIDUAL DIJFFERENOES : GENERA!. 307 

fluid. If, for some reason, tMs slieatli is ruptured the fluid 
oozes through into the adjoining fleshy parts, usually hardening 
into a spongy mass. In pianists this most frequently occurs on 
the back of lie hand near the TOist. The particular location is of 
practical importance. • If the cyst presses against a nerve when the 
fingers or a particular finger is used in playing, the condition may 
become acutely painful. Such a case has come to my attention 
recently. So long as rapid octaves were avoided no pain was felt 
by the pupil ; but each time drill in octaves was begun, pain quickly 
developed, and necessitated a complete lay-off ” for several days. 

Removal of the cyst by either the older method of spreading the 
accumulation by a forcible blow with some flat object, such as a 
book, or by surgical procedure, is not to be recommended off-hand. 
The value of such a procedure depends upon the cause of the cyst. 
If the cyst is caused by friction of the tendon over some projecting 
bone during normal movement, the removal of the cyst will not 
remove the cause, and when the pupil returns to practice, another 
cyst will, in aU probability, form. However, if the cyst be caused 
by an unusual strain placed upon the hand — ^a severe blow or 
sprain, the removal, always of course by a very competent surgeon, 
is to be recommended. Tightly bandaging the affected part 
frequently relieves the feeling of pain or strain during subsequent 
use, but creates an artificial pla 3 ang-condition that is of doubtful 
value if prolonged. Statistics seem to indicate that heredity also 
is to be reckoned with. 

Circulatory. 

The direct and very important effect of circulation upon muscular 
movement has already been noted in the case of Renaud’s disease. 
Between this extreme — the complete inhibition of circulation 
in the arterioles and capillaries of the fingers — ^and the normal 
circulation are many intermediate degrees of blood-flow. If 
extreme constriction is followed by complete loss of sensation in 
the affected parts, the conclusion follows that a partial constriction 
will be followed by a reduction of the sensitivity. Examples of 
variation in blood-flow are : the warming-up exercises of all 
athletes and instrumentalists. The former go through the gross 
motions of their respective activities ; the latter secure the result 
by washing their hands in warm or hot water ; by rubbing them 
together and working the fingers vigorously ; or, like Paderewski, 
by thundering out a series of massive chords. All these devices 
have for their aim an increase in the circulation and heightened 
sensitivity to reaction in the parts to be used. 



308 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

Not only doos the normal circulation differ among individuals, 
but the degree to which it can be changed, by exercise or emotional 
activity, varies also. The effect of cold, clammy hands upon 
piano-playing is well known to all teachers. The connection 
between such physiological states and the concomitant emotional 
states has been established by experimental physiology. Under 
the circulatory phases, comes the increase in the rate of blood- 
coagulation during emotional stress and the marked increase in 
blood-pressure. The latter may even reach a fifty per cent increase 
over normal, the amount varying considerably with the individual. 

Here, then, are circulatory factors that may help to account for 
individual differences in pianistic performances. Anemia, for 
example, is always a limiting force in muscular activity of any sort. 
It is a condition of sub-normal presence of red blood-corpuscles, 
and hence of oxygen-carrying devices, with the necessary lowering 
of muscular activity. The extreme pathological cases are obvious 
enough, but the undesirable effects of moderate anemia are not 
often detected. It would be wrong, however, to ignore their 
iafluence entirely. 

Neural. 

Individual differences in the structure and function of the nervous 
system are of no less frequent occurrence than in the physiological 
fields we have just considered. There is, for example, the variation 
m the number of muscle fibres innervated by a single motor neuron, 
which covers a range of more than eight-hundred per cent among 
the various muscles of the body. Then there is the rate at which 
the neural impulse travels, which varies not only between animals 
of different species, but among animals of the same species, though 
here to a less extent. Finally, we must add to these variables 
the refractory phase of the synapse. The junction of two neurons 
is effected by means of end-arborizations : a very fine net-work 
of fibrils (axons and dendrites). After the passage of a neural 
impulse, the synapse requires a certain amount of time (normally 
a very small part of a second) to recover fully its transmitting 
power. The rate of this recovery varies among individuals. 

Then, too, in spite of the enormous richness of association fibres, 
always present, there is yet room for considerable further individual 
variation. An interesting example of this is furnished by the 
synesthetic subjects, in whom sensations in one sense-department 
call forth, quite directly, sensations in other senses. Thus a tone 
will cause an image of a colour, or the reverse. (I do not include the 
extraneous experience associations here, but only the physiologic 



INDIVIDUAL DIFFEEENCES: GENERAL 309 

synestEesias.) Such, variations in association fibres could readily 
account for variations in the speed, delicacy, and . accuracy of 
muscular movements. In fact, this seems to be the field that may 
explain not a few problems of variations in piano tecLnique. Being 
neural it is primarily a psychological question, although its effects 
upon the muscles and the movement fall under physiological 
mechanics. 

Metabolic. 

Finally, in order to show how individual variation is still further 
determined by physiological structure, we may add a few results 
contributed by experimental physiology in the field of metabolism. 

Strychnine, for example, effects the neural system by obliterating 
the differences in the resistances of the synapse. As a result, the 
indiscriminate spread of neural activity to the muscular system in 
general brings about the familiar strychnine convulsions. Alcohol 
reduces the degree of the psycho-galvanic reflex. The connection 
with emotional states in both cases is a matter of common observa- 
tion. Arsenic is used as an alterrative : changing a morbid state 
into a healthy one. Blood-sugar is directly affected by emotional 
conditions, through the adrenalin secretion. A pupil who chanced 
to be examined shortly after piano examination was diagnosed 
as a probable diabetic until the surplus sugar was shown to be the 
dhect result of the preceding heightened emotional stress. Further- 
more, when the adrenal gland is stimulated, an improvement m 
muscular contraction follows ; and the converse of this is seen in 
Addison’s disease (a disease of the adrenal glands), the most marked 
characteristic of which is muscxdar weakness. When extract 
of the glands is introduced, both the amount and duration of con- 
traction of skeletal muscle are increased. In this chemistry of 
muscular action we have still another source of individual differences. 

In fact, it is well within the field of probability that the muscular 
inhibitions which piano pupils frequently experience under con- 
ditions of emotional strain (examination or concert) are caused by 
chemical changes in the psycho-physiological organism. The 
connection holds for all emotional states, which, we have reason to 
believe, are little else than the actual physiological changes. In 
popular parlance, these are supposed merely to accompany the 
emotional states. The feeling of limpness or muscular weakness 
which frequently precedes a public performance can possibly be 
brought about by an inhibition of the functioning of the adrenal 
and correlated glands. 

A combination of such circulatory, neural, and chemical variations 



310 lOnCH-MMS 0! PMO TECHIQUE 

can account for many of the vaiiations among pupils and within the 
individual pupil. Two facts necessary for this conclusion have 
already been established: the direct eSects of such changes; and 
the varying degrees in which the neural, circulatory, and chemical 
components are actually found in the human body. Investigation 
of these phases, with sufficiently sensitiveapparatusjis^ 
field for .the psychologist of music. The inference from even the 
cursory exposition just made is safe, that : a proper functioning 
of the used parts is a physiological necessity for proficiency in 
technique. Other things, of course, are necessary as well, but a 
poor fimctioning of the physiological organism is a real limitation. 
The many pathological examples: Mozart, Chopin, Schumann, 
Wagner, and others, do not invalidate the statement. In such 
instances the wel-known compensatory reactions of disease 
complicate the result. In fact, the direct connection of emotional 
states with physiologic abnormal function-the hyper- or hypo- 
secretion of the glands, and the resulting abnormal chemical 
reaction-is, in suA instances, evidence in support of the statement. 



CHAPTER XXn 


Individual Diiterenoes: The Hand 

The spatial relationships of the keyboard are fixed. The keyboard 
distance between the two specific tones of any given interval is a 
constant. Accordingly, any variability in the stretching thereof 
most be in the playing hands. The fundamental space-relationdiip 
which we have to consider is that of the straight line as the shortest 
distance between two points. In all stretches the fingers necessarily 
strive for strai^t-line positions. But to attempt to force all hands 
into one standard position— the normal arched position — a position, 
by the way, that is not even a physiological norm (see Kg. 166 
and Kg. 165 B) is seriously to restrict pianistic freedom and, in 
my estimation, is unwise pedagogy. It is as if we obliged each 
person to walk with a step of standard length, regardless of the length 
of the leg. The diff^ence here is gross, but in the fine adjustments 
used in piano-playing evm the sli^test restriction is a hindrance. 

The dimensions of the keyboard and the manner in which 
composers have written for ^e piano are such as to make the 
stretching of the necessary distances a problem for even normally 
full-grown hands. Such stretching is primarily a question of 
finger-abduction — the spreading of the fingers. Assuming A-B 
as a given keyboard interval and A-C and B-D as lengths of fingers, 
the lines in Fig. 164 show the difierent angles of abduction required 
for various widths of hand. A hand-width of C-D arables the 
player to reach the desired keys with parallel fingers and no angle 
of abduction or spread. If the hand is narrower (B-F) and finger- 
length the same (B-D = B-F = B-H) the hand must be moved 
slightly forward and the fingers spread into the angles A-E-F 
and B-F-E. A still narrower hand (G-H) moves the hand further 
forward and demands an excessive angle of abduction A-G-H and 
B-H-G. Wrist-position, also, is frequently influoiced by hand- 
formation. When, now, the fingers are short, the hand narrow, 
and the angle of finger-spread limited, it is physiologically impossible 
for such a hand to reach wide intervals. Shortness of fingers may 
be partly overcome by breadth of hand, or width of the abducting 
angle, or by both. Likewise, narrowness of hand, or smallness of 

311 



312 


TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

the angle of abduction may be helped by the length of iBngers. 
The three physiological determinants, therefore, of adaptability 
of the hand to the keyboard stretches are : length of finger, width 
of hand, and the angles of abduction among all fingers. In adult 
hands a third-finger length (measured from the knuckle) of 3 inches 
is subnormal; 3*5 to 4 inches normal; over 4, supernormal; 
hand-width, measured across the hand-knucHes, exclusive of the 
thumb, 3 to 3*5 inches subnormal ; 3*5 to 4 inches, normal ; over 
4, supernormal. The angle of abduction varies with the finger used, 
the second and the fifth fingers having the greatest range, the third 
next, the fourth least. This, it will be noticed, is in entire agree- 
ment with the physiological subdivision of the hand made in 
Chapter III where it was deduced from the anatomical structure 



Fie. 164. 


of the hand and its muscles. An approximate table of abducting 
values is : 


finger. 

Svhrmmal. 

Normal. 

Supernormal. 

2 

25° to 35° 

36°-45° 

46° to 55° 

3 

20° to 25° 

26°-33° 

34° to 40° 

4 

10° to 18° 

19°-24° 

25° to 35° 

5 

30° to 37° 

38°-45° 

46° to 60° 


A study of the foregoing relationships reveals also the advantage 
of the wide over the narrow hand. (Compare angles A-E-F and 
B-F-E, Kg. 164, wiiih angles A-G-H and B-H-G.) The latter 
n^essmlj uses ^eater spread of fingers, and thus increases the 
difficulty of flexing the fingCTs, since flexion and abduction 
are m at least moderate physiological opposition. (See p. 46.) 
So ^t, while a narrow hand may succeed in making the stretch 
individual keys in tbe stretched position is 
restocted. In fact the three factors of hand-width, finger-length 



INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 313 

and finger-abduction, to wbicb, of course, the similar thumb values 
must be added, will explain a surprisingly large number of technical 
dfficulties that are often wrongly attributed to defects of co- 
ordination or studentship. 

Among these, as a conspicuous example, is the hand-position 
adopted in octave work. If the octave stretch is insufficient, or 
just possible, the pupil plays against the outer edge of the white 
keys instead of on their top surface. The playing on the edge 
does not require any bending-in of the tip of either the thumb 
or the little finger, nor does it require an arched hand, and a slight 
gain in spread is the result. Such a position, however, is 
impracticable in the playing of any rapid octave passage. I know 
of numerous instances where dimiautive hands dei^itely terminated 
musical careers. 

The same may be said of the high-wrist position frequently 
adopted by pupils with small hands. Here the thumb plays 
with the wrist almost over the keys. The bending-in of the thumb- 
tip is not necessary in this position, hence there is, as before, a 
slight gain in the distance between thumb and fifth finger. At the 
same time such a position necessitates an excessive extension of 
the middle fingers, lest these strike the keys within the octave. 
Both positions are make-shifts of the small hand. In many 
instances they are the only means of playing the desired passage 
at all. And in both cases the octaves are played from the shoulder 
or elbow, according to the pitch of the passage, instead of from 
the wrist. Usually brilliance in extended work is absent. Every 
now and then, however, a pupil gifted with a finely coordinated 
kinesthetic sense can develop an effective octave technique with 
these fore-arm octaves, and we have then an instance where that 
phase of style has been determined by the physiological structure 
of the hand. 

Differences in adult hands, such as we have been considering, 
find a parallel in the differences among the hands of children of 
various ages and growth. These should be carefully considered 
in the assignment of work, permitting wide variations in the manner 
of playing or fingering a passage in order to adapt it to the physio- 
logical nature of the hand. For of all physiological instruments 
of movement, the hand with its appendages is by far 
the finest. The twenty or more joints and nearly thirty bones 
that make up its structure, and their manipulation by over 
thirty muscles make possible very fine adjustment of movement 
and help to account, among other things, for the surprising dexterity 
of many pianists. 



314 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

la tile chapter on The Skeleton a normal hand-position was 
deduced from the ranges of movement at the various joints, and 
normality was defined as a position near the middle of the range 
of movement, "When the h^d as a whole is considered, normal 
position may he defined as that position assumed by a body whrai 
in a passive state. The hand is in such a state in normal walkmg. 
Here it does no work and consequently is held in the position of 
greatest ease— its natural or normal position. If now, the 
deductions from skeletal structure are true, we diould expect 
to find the typical hand-position in walking, whenever the attention 
is not drawn toward the hand. The hand, then, not holding any 
object, hangs freely from the arm. With the object of learning 
the per cent of the frequency with which the normal hand-position, 
and any other typical forms, might occur, I counted and classified 
the hand-positions of fifty thousand persons. The observations 
were made upon the streets of various cities ; they included standing, 
and waUdng subjects ; men, women and older children. When 
a hand was in active motion (not the passive pendular swing of 
walking), or carried any object, it was not counted. The counts 
were made at random intervals in groups varying from fifty to 
several hundred and the results separately tabulated. -This 
procedure was necessary so that the constancy with which the 
percentages recurred in each group could be determined. The 
groups of course, were unselected, save for their urban character, 
representing merely the persons I passed on the street. 

Fig. 165 shows the various types of hand-position which this 
observation revealed. A is a position of moderate flexion increasing 
slightly from the index to the little finger, side view ; B is the same 
position, dorsal view ; 0, a position m which the fingers are over- 
flexed, while thumb is extended; D, a position showing index 
isolation ; E, a position showing extension of the second and fifth 
fingers ; F, extension of all fingers. A and B, therefore, represent 
the normal position just described. 0 shows the isolation of the 
thmnb (and A also). A, B, D show the isolation, or fundamental 
separation of the index toger (this being the only finger the nail of 
which is visible), the next physiological division af^ tiie thumb 
(see p. 44) ; E and F also show the fifth-finger separation. 
Accordingly, we should expect to find positions A (B) present 
most frequently. 

The actual dislaibution found in the observations made was as 
follows : — 

When the groups were averaged ; Tfpe A or (B) and I) yielded 



Plate XXXV 





INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 315 

87 per cent ; type E yielded 7 per cent ; type 0 yielded 2 per cent ; 
type F yielded 1 per cent. Another type (with clenched thumb, 
instead of extended) yielded approximately one per cent, while the 
remaining two per cent were distributed among various miscel- 
laneous types, transient positions difficult to classify. When ob- 
servations are combined in groups of 500, we find that types A 
and D varied in frequency between 74 and 93 per cent ; type E 
between 3 and 12 per cent. The variations in the frequency of 
the remaining types are negligible. Two phases of this distribu- 
tion stand out clearly : first, the marked preponderance of positions 
A and D, the normal position, over all other positions, alone 
or in combination ; and the greater frequency of position B in 
relation to all other positions except the normal ; and secondly, 
the constancy of this frequency shown by the low coefficient 
of variability. 

The question now arises whether we have the right to apply this 
normal position of a vertical arm to the horizontal position of the 
hand required in piano-playing. The only real difference would be 
the action of gravity. If this were of sufficient force to affect 
the finger-positions, then, since it acts vertically downward, the 
fingers would be fully extended in a hanging hand. This, however, 
is not true ; gravity is actually resisted slightly by the partially 
flexed fingers. This gives as Hke normal passive hand-position 
that shown in Fig. 165 A and B, which, when applied to the keyboard, 
wiU appear as in Fig. 166. Mirrored projections are included to 
show the position from various angles. The experienced teacher 
will at once recognize here the typical keyboard position of the 
imtrained child. The hand-knucldes slant toward the fifth finger, 
and the fingers in consequence stand at a slant to the vertical 
line of key-action. The flexion increases as we pass from index 
to fiLfth finger. 

The frequency of position E, Fig. 166, also points to this form as 
typical or natural particularly because some extension of the index 
finger is present also in type A. Additional proof of this is found 
in the naming of the second finger as “index” finger (German: 
Zeige-finger) as well as in the general representation of a hand by 
the anatomists, who give usually a fully supinated hand as one 
standard form, and an extended index finger, with other flexed 
fingers (position D, Fig. 165) as the other typical form. 

The few instances of separation of second and fifth fingers (position 
E, Fig. 166) have their explanation in the fact that the greater 
freedom of the fifth finger is essentially concerned with the muscles 
forming the hyperthenar eminence, hence having to do with 



316 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

increased flexion, ratiher tlian extension. We do not find the fifth 
finger extended alone on that account. On the other hand, these 
muscles explain the greater curvature of the fifth finger when 
compared to that of the third, in the normal hand-position, and also 
the curvature of the fourth finger which is flexed through tendonous 
attachment, sympathetically with the fifth finger. 

The negligible frequency (less than one per cent) of a fully 
extended hand is especially interesting, in view of the fact that 
piano teachers find it necessary constantly to work against flat 
fingers ”, and yet, naturally, fingers are not held flat, but moderately 
curved. The tendency of beguiners at the piano to flatten (fully 
extend) their fingers (see Fig. 165 F), accordingly, cannot be 
explained as a natural physiological finger-position, but as the result 
of the application of the hand to the keyboard. The striving for 
a straight-line position, pointed out in an earlier paragraph, means 
that any attempt at stretching Will cause extension, and insistence 
upon high finger-lift may do so likewise. In stretching, extended 
fiingers cover a greater range than flexed fingers ; and in the lifted 
position the tips of the extended fingers are higher than those of 
flexed fingers. It is entirely natural, therefore, that the child, 
with the aim of the movement maximum stretch or lift, should 
extend the fingers. Non-stretching exercises and moderate finger- 
lift are valuable aids in eliminating or avoiding the so-called flat 
fingers, to say nothing of their aid in avoiding stiflEness. 

All this has its explanation in the basic physiological function 
of the hand : the grasping movement and its negative opposite, 
release of the grasped object. In its natural form this movement 
involves simultaneous flexion of the thumb and of all the fingers, 
and hand-release likewise involves simultaneous extension of thumb 
and fingers. The physiologically simplest finger-stroke, therefore, 
is a movement in which the fully extended finger is flexed at the 
hand-joint, while flexion at the two finger-joints brings the tip 
of the finger against the middle of the palm of the hand, which 
is the movement made in grasping a small object. It is similar 
to the form of finger-stroke used in playing a rapidly repeated tone. 
But it is not the finger-stroke that modem pedagogy has found 
best for practical purposes. To meet these demands a vertical 
descent of the nail-joint is required. Such a movement, as a study 
of the figures in Chapter X7II, showing finger-stroke, will reveal, 
can be made only if sli^t extension at the two finger-joints 
accompanies flexion at the hand-knuckles. In other words, it is 
a coordinated movement differing from the physiological grasping 
reflex. The difficulty for the b^eginner is in this simultaneous 



INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 317 

flexion and extension of the various finger joints. By directing 
the pupil’s attention in turn to these two basic conditions of the 
movement, the natural general flexion may be overcome. In this 
connection, I have found it helpful to let the pupil start with the 
finger-tip as nearly against the ventral surface of the hand-knucMe 
as possible, and to aim for the end of a black-key, instead of a white 



key. Thus the pupil starts with the two finger-joints in a position 
of extreme flexion, while the hand-knuclde is in a position of 
extreme extension ; and ends with fuUy extended finger-joints 
and reasonably flexed hand-knucHe. The differences are thus 
magnified for the pupil, in accordance with the pedagogic principle 
of intensive presentation as an effective means of retention. 

The physiologically natural hand-position is that shown in Fig. 



31& TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

166 and it is the object of piano pedagogy to adapt this form, 
so far as possible, to the technical demands of the instrument. 
Such a position is preponderantly normal, as the percentile distribu- 
tion given on p. 315 shows, and individual differences here stand 
at a TniniTmiTn . I have yet to find a single pupil, if he has never 
played piano or watched trained hands play, who will not place 
his hand upon the keyboard as in Fig. 166, so long as nothing is 
said to him about hand-position. Individual differences appear, 
however, once we have secured the horizontal hand and begin 
work with size and proportion of hand-parts. 

Individual differences in the various parts of the hand are seen 
most clearly when the hand-t^es are pictorially presented. Fig. 

167 illustrates some of the differences we have been considering. 
The scale of reduction for all the types is the same, therefore 
the relative sizes remain as they were originally. The pantograph 
illustrations are taken from direct tracings of hands. 

Differences in the size of hands are strikmgly shown in a, b, c. 
a and b are both adult hands yet the difiference m size is greater 
than that between b and o, c being the hand of an undersized boy of 
nine years. To expect hand b to adopt and use in piano-playing 
a technique the same as that used by a is to expect the impossible. 
I do not refer here merely to the most obvious differences m stretch 
but to the entice technique. The degree, for example, to which 
arm-motion will and should supplement finger-action will differ 
radically between the two. Since both are adult hands, and both 
have had similar amounts of training, we cannot obviate this 
difference by an appropriate difference in the ease of assignments. 
Instead, the hand-difference demands a difference m style, which, 
as a matter of fact, is clearly evident in the playing of the two 
pupils. 

d and e show differences in the angle of abduction between the 
thumb and the fifth finger. Type d shows approximately the lower 
limit, 75® ; e shows a fairly high angle, 127®. Although S is a much 
larger hand than e, the stretch between the tip of the thumb and 
that of the fifth finger is more than one-half inch greater for the 
small hand, a difference of one piano-key. la d b, line connecting 
the tip of the ihumb with that of the fifth finger will cut the three 
intervening fingers weU above the hand-knucHes, while m e a 
similar line cuts the palm of the hand. These differences in the 
proportions of the hand naturally make for differences in the 
pianistic use of the hand. Hand d is pianistically at a marked 
disadvantage. 

/ and g show the difference between a decidedly unfavourable 



INDIVIDUAL DIPFEEENCES; THE HAND 319 

hand and a very favourable type. The former is handicapped by 
a short stretch between thumb and index finger ; very high webs 
between 2 and 3, and between 3 and 4 ; generally massive and 
stiff build for a child’s hand ; small angle of abduction between 
1 and 6, and small range of movement at the wrist, g is the hand 
of a boy of approximately the same age, and possesses all the 
attributes missing in the type just described. The difference in 
the progress of these two pupils has been primarily determined 
by differences in the hand-formation. 

Finally, in A is shown the tapering-finger type, popularly termed 
“ artistic ” (although it is usually the bane of the teacher) ; and in 
i a massive type. By looking at the hand types the probable 
differences in tone-production can readily be discerned. And, 
as a matter of fact, in these cases, the differences exist. Pupil h 
always plays with a light, delicate touch ; pupil i characteristically 
forces the tone. Both have sufficient technical control and 
dexterity to eliminate these factors as determinants of tone-quality. 
Careful experimentation with both has convinced me that the 
difference is primarily the result of the anatomical structure of the 
hand, to which that of the arm should be added. This does not 
mean that the style is not subject to pedagogical control, but it 
does mean that the primary difference between the two is anatomical, 
having nothing to do with personality. 

The tracings in Pig. 167 were used merely to illustrate differences 
in the anatomical structure of the hand as a whole. But similar 
differences, rather physiological in nature, exist in the articulations 
among the various parts of the hand. Sub-normal ranges of 
movement at any joint may be looked upon as a pianistic dis- 
advantage. True, the player may overcome the limitation by 
substitutiug some other coordination for it, but the fact remains 
that this, in turn, becomes an unnecessary movement for the 
normal hand. Difficulties of technique may frequently be traced 
directly to a narrow range of movement in some joint or joints. 
Many hands, for example, with sufficient stretch to command 
an octave easily, cannot stretch C-E-flat-A-flat-C, right hand 
with 1-2-4-6 respectively because the angle of abduction between 
4 and 5 is too small. They substitute 3 for 4, and thus find that a 
chord such as C-E-flat-G-flat-A-flat-C cannot be played. For 
other hands, stretches such as F--G-flat-Ar-Cr-P, G-D-flat-E-flat-G- 
flat-C, or A-flat-B-D-flat-E-B-flat played with 1-2-3-4-5, right 
hand, are not very difficult. They are impossible for many adult 
hands on account of the angle of abduction demanded between the 
fomth and the fifth fingers. I cite these examples merely to show 



320 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIAKO TECHNIQUE 

■the direct dependence of some phases of technical ability upon 
the physiological structure of the hand. To convey some idea of 
the extent of these differences I measured the hand-movements 
of a number of pupils and in the following table give the extremes 
found. 


Bange 

min, maxim, min. maxim. 


Dorsal flexion of wrist (bending wrist back) 

Ventral flexion of wrist (bending wrist down) 

Wrist abduction toward 5th finger (bending wrist 

45“ 

50“ 

90“ I 
90“ J 

[ 100“ 

178“ 

sidewise) . . 

Wrist abduction toward thumb (bending wrist sidewise) 

32“ 

14“ 

62“1 
35“ J 

[■ 52“ 

93“ 

Flexion of hand-knuckle, average for all four fingers 
Abduction of extended fingers (sidewise motion), 


— 

72“ 

90“ 

average for all four fingers 

Flexion of middle-finger joint, average for all four 



28“ 

40“ 

fingers 

— 

— 

90“ 

118“ 

Flexion of nail-joint, average for all four fingers 

— 

— 

53“ 

86“ 


Significant as tliese individual differences are, tlxey only begin 
to show the extent of physiological variations in piano-playing. 
If we recall the coordination demanded when the parts of the hand 
move near their extremes of range (see p. 46) we can understand 
the extent to which fatigue will play a role if the passage denoands 
repeated use of this extreme range. A composition based upon 
full chords, even one of no great extent or difiBculty, let us say the 
familiar Chopin Prelude in C Minor or MacDowelFs “ To the Sea ”, 
is exteemely fatiguing to a hand whose angles of finger abduction 
(spread of fngers) can just about make the stretches. For a hand 
commanding a wider range, fatigue in these pieces is entirely absent. 
This fatigue is not the result of an incoordinated movement. It is 
the necessary accompaniment of motion at extreme ranges. 
Limitation at a single joint can cause it, if an awkward chord- 
position chances to recur sufficiently. And since the difficulty 
may not exist for the teacher’s hand, the early onset of fatigue is 
often erroneously assigned to the stiffness of an incoordinated 
movement. I recall an instance where the change of a single 
finger, the substitution of 3 for 4 on A-flat in the chord C-E-flat- 
A-flat-C relieved the fatigue immediately and changed the playing 
of a piece from an awkward performance into a musically acceptable 
one. The chord occurred many times in the composition. Fine 
dynamic gradation, moreover, with the fingers in extreme stretches, 
is physiologically impossible. 

It is usually very advisable for a teacher to acquaint himself with 
the details of the physiological structure of the pnpil’s hand. 
Pupils seldom use wrong ^germg through sheer carelessness. 



iNDIVlDtrAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 32 l 

Tile fingering they substitute is, for them, an easier fingering, 
determined primarily by title physiological structure of the hand 
and the amount of training. A pupil with a very narrow hand 
and a wide stretch between thumb and second finger, frequently 
plays intervals as wide as a sixth, with 1 and 2, particularly if 5 
be occupied. C-A-flat-C right hand, wiU be fingered 1-2-5 instead 
of 1-3-5, or better perhaps l-4r-5. The rapid playing of chords 
demanding wide spacing among 3-4r-5 is a source of continued 
difiGiculty for such a hand. A pupil with a wide hand and a narrow 
or normal stretch between 1 and 2, will never finger the A-flat with 
the second finger. Short thumbs are another determinant. The 
passing-under in scales and arpeggios is doubly diflicult and the 
smooth lateral shift of hand and arm are much harder to attain 
than in the case of normal or long thumbs. 

Thus the ramifications of these difierences extend over into the 
field of style. A Imowledge of them will save the teacher much 
needless work on relaxation and phrasing as the pupil progresses. 
From the ranges given on p. 320, the probable later difl&culties 
resulting from limitation of physiological movement may be learned 
at the beginning and appropriate measures of correction or 
adaptation taken. 

“V^en the differences in range of motion which we have just been 
studying reach extreme stages, they are customarily given specific 
names such as stiffness or double-jointedness. These terms do not 
designate conditions apart from all others, but merely those readily 
manifest on account of their magnitude. Similar conditions, as 
I have already mentioned, constantly exist in less degree, and often 
escape detection on account of their minuteness. 



In the chapter on The Skeleton, the tissues, cartilagenous and 
bony parts determining the amount of movement, were described. 
Here we are concerned with the effect of these restrictions upon 
hand- and finger-position and movemeiit when applied to the 
keyboard. They are not infrequently found m the nail-joints of the 
fingers. As a result of this restriction, the playing-finger assumes 
the position shown in Fig. 168, in which the &st interphalangeal 
joint (middle fitnger^joint) shows an excessive amount of flexion, 
in order to coimteract the total absence of flexion at the nafl-joint. 
The latter is not flexed because the restrictions at this joint make it 
impossible to flex it without a great amount of muscular contraction 
— ^and even then, in many cases, it cannot be done. But such an 
amount of contraction would make free finger-movement impossible 



322 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

and, lieiice, would seriously interfere with, actual playing. The 
fingers, when curved less than into a vertical position of the nail- 
joint have a tendency to extend (break-in) at the nail-joints, a thing 
which, again, is technically undesirable. Pupils with this articular 
limitation often lack the finer dynamic control upon which all 
piano tone-quality depends. This lack of control is caused by the 
looseness ” of the nail-joint when the middle finger-joint is fully, 
or almost fully, flexed. In such a position, when the finger is not 
resting upon any resistance, the finger-tip may be tapped and will 
spring back and forth, a movement over which there is no control. 
With moderate curvature at both finger-joints key-resistance can 
be accurately judged and an appropriate tonal intensity produced. 

Another joint in which, as far as my own experience goes, limited 
motion occurs with sufidcient frequency to warrant its discussion 
here, is the wrist-joint. The extreme range of motion at the middle 
finger-joint, of which only a small part is used in the finger-stroke 
of the pianist, and the motion at the hand-knuckles I have always 
found ample to meet all needs of a vertical finger-stroke. In the 
case of the wrist, however, limited extension or flexio. * a drawback 
technically, because the wrist, far more than is generally supposed, 
is almost in constant use in any piano-playiag beyond the elementary 
stage. El the table of hand-measurements, the range of dorsal 
flexion varies from 45 to 90 degrees. That is to say, some hands 
have twice the range of other hands. Above 75 degrees may be 
considered normal. Accordingly, a hand with a maximum wrist- 
extension of 45 degrees is handicapped in ease of movement. All 
hand-staccato, for example, demands wrist extension, and even 
the normal hand-position, as determined by the keyboard require- 
ments (see Fig. 166), demands a wrist extension of between 30 and 
38 degrees. With a maximum range of 50 degrees, this requires 
constant playing near the upper extreme of range wiHi its resultant 
physiological strain and fatigue. It is, therefore, quite natural 
that we find the pupils with this articular limitation playing from 
a “ high-wrist ” position, a position in which the playing-range 
has been thrown more nearly in the centre of the complete range of 
motion of the wrist-joint, which reaches over to the flexion-side 
as well as the extension-side. Such movement along the middle 
of the range of motion is physiologically easier than movement 
at either extreme, and is naturally adopted by the pupil. Coupled 
with this position of high-wrist is Hie fore-arm octave playing 
already described (p. 313) for small hands. In both cases the position 
of the wrist makes wrist-octaves awkward, thus favouring a transfer 
of the fulcrum to the elbow. 



Plate XXXVI 




INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 323 


Conditions of stiffness yield to treatment. Forceful pressing 
of the joint beyond the point of maximal flexion when only the 
muscles act, if done regularly and carefully, and if not forced too 
far or too suddenly, will gradually extend the range of motion, 
although the gain is small in comparison to the time, patience, and 
work expended thereon. The extent to which such treatment 
is successful, depends upon the exact nature of the stiffness. If 
the latter is in the capsular ligament, continued pulling will 
eventually add slightly to the length of this normally inextensible 
tissue. If in the cartilagenous part of the articulation, that, too, 
will yield slightly. If in the bone formation itself, little can be 
done. 

It is unsafe to assign the restriction to ligaments or bones from 
external observation alone. The X-ray is necessary before the 
cause can be definitely located. Fig. 169a shows the left wrist 
region of a pupil who has a very limited range of wrist articulation. 
The carpal bones are somewhat thick, but, although contributing 
to the smallness of the range, are not of sufficient thickness to 
accoimt for it entirely. 

Fig. 1696 shows a wrist in a position of extreme palmar flexion, 
the extreme pianistic high-wrist position. There is an unusual 
amount of movement between the metacarpal and the adjoining 
row of carpal bones at the point marked m. In the other figure 
the two sets of bones are shown in a straight line. (Compare 
also the wrist structures of Fig. 170 and note the differences in 
articulation between the two bones indicated by the arrow.) Con- 
clusions drawn from one or two examples would be unsafe, but in all 
the illustrations given later we find such skeletal differences. As a 
matter of fact, Fig. 169a is the wrist of a pupil who cannot flex his 
wrist far, whereas Fig. 1696 is a wrist with hyper-flexion, the same 
as that ^own in Fig. 170a. An additional illustration, this time 
concerning the angle of flexion of the middle joiat of the index 
finger, is given in Fig. 171a, 6. In both cases the finger was flexed 
as far as possible, the pupils doing their utmost to bend the finger 
at that joint. In a the bone-ends are not in contact on the ventral 
surface, indicated by the arrow. Consequently, the impossibility 
of bending the finger further at this joint cannot result from skeletal 
linodtation, but must result from the contact of the fleshy parts, 
tendons, and ligaments. In 6, however, the edge of the one bone 
(second phalangeal) rests flush against the inner side of the first 
phalangeal, thus setting a definite bone limit to the range of move- 
ment. Fig. 171 shows the impossibility of assigning range limita- 
^ tion to a single factor. Two factors may operate : the bones, and 



324 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

tlie soft paxts surrounding the joints. The illustrations in Fig. 171 
are interesting because case ci> has considerable difficulty in technique 
on account of the very linaited range of movement in the various 
joints, whereas 6 is the finger of a pupil with marked technical 
ability. 

Dovhle-J ointeiness. 

The opposite of the subnormal articulation just described is 
the excessive range of articulation shown in cases where the well- 
rounded form of the bone-ends and the receded position of cartilage 
or the relative looseness of the capsular ligaments permit a greater 
motion in the joint than that normally found. This condition 
I have found of more frequent occurrence than the condition of 
equally marked subnormal articulation, and the difficulties which 
it presents to pupil and teacher are also more, numerous. 

The use of the word double-jointedness is unfortunate. The 
articulation is not double ; that is to say there are not two joints 
present for the normal one. The difference is merely one of degree, 
the formation of the bones at the joint in addition to the stretch 
of capsular ligaments and tendons permitting the bones to move 
further over the articulating surfaces than normally. The jerk 
which is a familar stunt ’’ of people possessing such joints results 
from the sudden slipping of Uie articulation from one plane to 
another. Such a jerk is usually most noticeable with considerable 
simultaneous contraction of flexors and extensors. This, as I 
pointed out in the chapter on Relaxation, presses the surfaces of 
the joint more firmly together. Consequently, there is more of 
a snap when the plane of articulation changes abruptly. 

The condition may occur in any joint, series of joints, or in 
aU joints of the hand. One extreme case has come to my attention 
where the snapping noises, as a result of double-jointedness in the 
large as well as the small joints throughout the body, made it quite 
impossible for a young lady to enter church or the quiet of a theatre 
without attracting attention from all sides. 

The joints most frequently involved in hyper-movement in 
piano-playing, perhaps, are the middle thumb-joint (thumb-knuckle) 
and the hand-knucMe of the fifth finger. When the former breaks, 
it seriously interferes with the stretch between thumb-tip and little 
finger, reducing it often to a point, at which octave-playing is 
impossible. Next in order of frequency are the metacarpo-phalangeal 
joints (hand-knuckles). An extreme instance of the latter with 
hyper-extension of the wrist, permits the pupil to touch the back 
of the fore-arm with the finger nails of the fingers on the same arm. 





Big. 172. Various types of hyper-extension (“ double-jointedness”). 


[To face p. 324 





173- Hyper-extension in thumb-joints ; b and differences 
in bone-ends responsible for differences in range of movement. 


INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 325 


by pushing back the fingers at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints. 
Recently I have met with a case of marked hyper-extension in the 
middle finger-joints as a result of which the hand frequently 
assumes the position such as that in Fig. 172a. 6, in the same figure 
shows the double-jointed fifth finger, and c shows marked hyper- 
extension in all hand-knuckles, the last against external resistance. 

As with stiffness, so with looseness : it may be caused either by 
bone-formation or loose ligaments surrounding the joints, or both. 
The X-ray will definitely reveal the former, and the absence of 
bone-cause makes the ligamentous inference safe. Fig. 173a 
shows a case of a double-jointed thumb. In both joints, particularly 
in the knuckle, the one bone has slipped completely around to the 
side of the other. Moreover, there is still a noticeable gap between 
the head of the metacarpal and the base of the first phalangeal. 
Fig. 173c shows the same joint, and, for comparison, 6, another 
thumb-joint of a pupil who has difficulty in flexing the thumb in 
either direction. Here a very marked difference of bone structure 
may be seen. In c the head of the metacarpal bone is entirely 
round, in 6 it is flat. The arrows point to the differences in curvature. 
It is obvious that the turning of the upper bone upon the lower 
can take place through a much greater range and much more 
smoothly in c than in 6. Here, then, is a definite skeletal difference. 
No amount of practice and no stretch exercise will help b to increase 
the range of action to that of c. It so happens that the pupil with 
limited range shows similar structure in other joints. At the same 
time he has extreme difficulty in technical passages, which he cannot 
overcome in spite of a great willingness to drill. 

In Fig. 174 an extreme case of double-jointedness in the hand- 
knuckle of the fifth finger is shown, and also in the nail-joint. The 
direction of the bones at the bottom of the picture points out the 
position of the hand, which is horizontal, so that the fifth finger 
stands vertically. The first phalanx has moved entirely on top 
of the head of the metacarpal bone. The position is that given 
in Fig. 172c. 

But, although the differences just mentioned are entirely skeletal, 
it is not safe to attribute all instances of double-jointedness or 
stiffness to bone-structure. 

Fig. 175a illustrates the hand-knuckles, seen from above, of a 
"upil whose range of flexion at these joints is very limited. But 

e formation of the bone-heads and bases, as well as the distances 

tween head and base are very similar to, almost identical with 
nose of a double-j omted hand 6, the same figure. Yet the differences 
m facility of movement between these two hands, as measured 



326 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

by finger-movements, especially in tbe joints pbotograpbed, are 
most marked. In such cases, the limitation must be caused by 
the ligaments and flesh surrounding the joints. In Fig. 176 the 
nail-joint of the index finger of a violin pupil is shown. The pupil 
has dijficulty in getting this finger-tip on the finger-board in a 
flexed position. In this case the difficulty seems to be both skeletal 
and ligamentous. The joint shows a very close articulation between 
the two bones, the middle finger-joint showing a more rounded 
spacing (compare also with articulation in the similar joint of 
Fig. 1716). In the second place, the base of the third phalanx is 
rather pointed and meets the head of the second phalanx at its 
ventral edge, thus, perhaps, preventing the bone of the finger-tip 
from sliding around the side easily. Such a bone-position can be 
caused by the restriction of the dorsal capsular ligament. If the 
bones were a bit looser and the extensor tendon and capsular 
ligament also, the bone formation alone would not limit the range 
at the point given. 

Nor do aU cases of hyper-movement result from bone-formation. 
In both a and 6 of Fig. 177 the bone-ends, base and head, are 
relatively flat (one shows the thumb-tip, the other the fifth fibager- 
tip), yet in both cases full extension was possible. This is again a 
ligamentous difference, operating this time by being too loose, 
whereas in Fig. 176 it limits the range by being too tight. 

EandrTyfes. 

Individual differences in hand-movements, however, are not 
restricted to the joints, nor to the formation of the heads and 
bases of the bones. Differences in the bone-shafts likewise affect 
the manipulation of the hand parts. I shall take up next the study 
of a few hands of pupils with whose work I am very familiar, and 
shall attempt to point out some physiological causes of their various 
technical abilities. 

Fig. 178 shows the skeleton of the left hand of a male adult. 
The individual characteristics of this hand are : — 

(1) General heavy bone structure. 

(2) Width of bone-shafts compared with heads and bases. 

(3) Close approximation between the first and second phalanges. 

(4) Heavy, but not particularly closely articulating, carpals. 

The technique of this pupil is extremely limited. His hand, in 
playing, falls naturally into two positions : when the arch is 
maintained, curving of either finger-joint is lost. 'V^Tien curved 
finger-tips are demanded, the hand-arch breaks. A study of 





[To face p, 326 




Fig. 179. Relatively massive hand-skeleton. 


INDIVIDUAL DIFFEKENCES: THE HAND 327 

Fig. 178 shows that greatest ease of movement is in the hand- 
knuckles, the bone-ends here being less close than in either first 
or second finger-joints. If the close approximation in the finger- 
joint makes fl.exion in these joints more diflScult, and mechanically 
this is not only possible but necessary, a cause for the hand 
assuming either of the two positions is shown. As a matter of fact, 
intensive drilling to alter this condition has produced scarcely 
any results, which strengthens the assumption that the hand- 
position difficulties are the result of skeletal structure. His octave 
technique, so far as the freedom of movement is concerned within 
a limited range, is normal, and the wrist region of Fig. 178 shows a 
normal bone-structure. 

Fig. 179 is the right hand, palmar view, of a male adult. The 
characteristics to be noted are : — 

(1) Massive bone structure. 

(2) Cylindrical shafts of most bones (compare with Fig. 181 
and Fig. 183). 

(3) Eelatively flat heads of the m.etacarpals (wi). 

(4) Parallel edges between the bases of the first phalanges and 
the heads of the metacarpals (m-n) (compare with Fig. 181). 

The technique of this pupil is characterized by an unusually stiff 
hand, with very limited movement in the hand-knuckles, both in a 
vertical plane (flexion and extension), and in a horizontal plane 
(abduction). Difficulty of thumb-action is also present. A study 
of Fig. 179 shows that the massive bone-structure, particularly 
in the metacarpal region, restricts the spaces in which the inter- 
roseous muscles and the lumbricales are situated. This position 
may be seen by referring to Fig. 18 E showing the muscles of the 
hand in position. Apart from the strong skeletal structure, the pupil 
has strong hand muscles. Since the power of a muscle depends 
upon the size of its cross-section, the muscles, like the bones, are 
thicker than usual. Accordingly, they press more firmly than 
usual against the sides of the bones themselves and upon the 
surrounding tissues. Moreover, in watching the finger-movements, 
and by trying the experiment (described on p. 117) of pushing 
aside the tendon, I found that the tendons themselves were not 
slack, even in a state of complete relaxation. These conditions 
combine to produce what we generally term a tightly-knit hand, 
a condition to which the thick fleshy parts, shown in faint outline 
in Fig. 179, contribute. Were the metacarpal bones less cylindrical, 
the interroseous muscles, lying parallel to the bones and between 
them, would leave more room for the tendons, circulatory vessels, 
and nerves that pass among them. 



328 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

The flat heads of the metacarpals, seen from above, do not them- 
selves affect the down-stroke of the Anger, unless the same bone- 
formation is present when viewed from the side. This is not the 
case. In Fig. 180 which is another picture of the same hand, the 
round head of the metacarpal and those of the first phalanges 
can be seen. Accordingly, any restriction of vertical movement 
at these joints is not caused by skeletal structure. This does not 
hold, however, for lateral movement : the spread of the fingers. 
Here the flat heads prevent the head from acting as a centre of the 
arc of movement. The actual centre for the fourth finger is at o. 
Fig. 179, beyond the head, along the shaft, six-tenths of an inch 
from the articulating edge. In Fig. 181 a normal bone-end is 
shown and the centre of abduction is again indicated by o. The 
point now lies in the head of the bone one-quarter inch behind 
the articulating surface. The lengths of the two hands in question 
are, respectively, eight, and seven and one-half inches, so that the 
difference in the arcs of movement are not the result of mere 
hand-size. In the case of the flat-head, the phalanx must shift 
sidewise considerably before being able to turn. lii the normal case 
the turning begins immediately without any lateral shift. And 
since a lateral shift at these joints is normally impossible on account 
of ligaments and hand structure, the difficulty of finger-spread 
in a hand with relatively flat metacarpal heads, is readily under- 
stood. In such a case no amount of training will help, a fact 
demonstrated by several years of practice in this particular case. 

Fig. 181 is a Koentgenogram of the hands of a very talented girl 
of fifteen. The left hand is a dorsal view, the right hand a palmar 
view. The type of hand, as the outlines indicate, is the long, 
slender type. Articulations in all the joints are free : the shafts 
of the metacarpals are slender, allowing ample room for tendons 
and muscles. The formation of the nail-joint of the thumb prevents 
hyper-extension at this joint. For the sake of comparison I add 
a case of the opposite condition, in which the pupil can bend back 
the thumb-tip considerably at the nail-joint. Fig. 182. It is a very 
noticeable example of range being determined by bone-formation. 
In Fig. 182, showing the nail-joint of the right thumb, the edge 
h protrudes beyond a ; in Fig. 181 for the same joint the reverse 
is the case. 

Fig. 181 may be considered a typically favourable skeletal 
structoe for the particular type of hand shown. The dark lines 
running across the head of the radius, at the bottom of the picture, 
are not fractures, but lines of ossffication, the head uniting firmly 
with the shaft at about the twentieth year. (No wonder the 




Plate XLII 



a. 


Fig. 182. Limitation of range by 
bone formation. 



Fig. 183. Limitation of abduction between third and fourth fingers by 
tissues. Skeletal structure would permit greater range. 


[To face p. 329 


INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 329 


specialist smiles when his female patients give a fictitious age. 
He may put down quite a different age when he sees his X-rays.) 

We have thus far considered limitations in range when they 
were abnormal. In normal hands the limitations are almost always 
caused by tendonous pull, skin or other ligamentous structures. 
In Fig. 183 maximal abduction between the third and fourth fingers 
is shown. The hand is the same as that of Fig. 181. In this case 
•the limitation is obviously caused by the skin and the ligamentous 
sheath that runs across the hand in the region of the hand-knuckles. 
The joints are by no means at their limit of range, being scarcely 
affected by the spread. Accordingly, in such instances, properly 
conducted massage of the skin region between the fitngers will 
help to iucrease the range of movement when this is desirable, 
for all living tissue yields to prolonged tension. As we have seen, 
in all narrow hands, considerable finger-spread is needed to make up 
the deficiency in hand-width (see Fig. 164). Were the limitation 
skeletal, such exercises would have little or no value. Obviously, 
when either hyper- or hypo-tension occurs in many joints, the 
effects are summated and the pedagogical difiSculties are corre- 
spondingly increased. 

Whatever be the location or form of double-jointedness, the effect 
upon the mechanical principle underlying joint-movement 
(stationary fulcrum) is the same. The resistance which the normal 
joint interposes against excessive motion in any direction is missing. 
Accordingly, if motion in that direction beyond the normal limit 
is to be restricted, this work must be done by those muscles pulling 
the bone in the opposite direction ; in the cases here described, by 
the flexors of the various joints. In other words, whatever excessive 
“ looseness ” or “ play ’’ exists in the joint must be overcome by 
contracting the muscles ; a contraction that will most often involve 
both flexors and extensors, so as to press the articulating surfaces 
more firmly together or to take up any “ slack ’’ in the surrounding 
tissues. Needless to say, this will not actually reduce the range of 
motion, but will minimize the danger of the bone ends slipping 
into the extreme position under normal resistance. A physiological 
reduction of the range of motion into the normal I do not consider 
possible. But a control of the range of motion is entirely possible 
with proper muscular contraction. Musculaxly the problem is 
similar to the breaking-in of the nail-joint, and its correction is 
correspondingly the same. Moreover, any exercises that develop 
the flexors without at the same time (through return motion) 
developing the extensors, are useful devices, since they will turn 
the balance of muscular pull toward the palmar side of the hand, 



330 TOUCH-FOEMS OP PIANO TECHNIQUE 

where it is wanted. Squeezing an elastic body small enough to be 
held in the partly closed hand, with all fingers, letting the elasticity 
of the body re-extend the fingers, is such an exercise: By its 
constant use I have succeeded in overcoming in two years many 
pianistic defects of a markedly double-jointed hand. 

Pig. 184 illustrates the physiological and mechanical causes for 
joint-action in the condition called double-jointedness. 

The preceding X-ray photographs of such fingers, give the actual 
picture of the skeletal position. Pig. 184 is a diagrammatic repre- 
sentation of the interaction of the forces at work. T^e finger- 
position shown is taken from an X-ray for a double- jointed fifth 



Fig. 184. 


finger, and the joint represented is the hand-knuckle of that finger. 
a represents the line of pull of the finger-extensor, 6 that of the 
finger-flexor, which is assumed to be pulling twice as hard as a 
and should normally pull the bone end d around toward the lower 
side. We find, however, that, in the position given, both forces 
are acting parallel. Their combined action, therefore, according 
to the principle under Parallel Porces in the chapter on Mechanical 
Principles, is a resultant of the magnitude and direction of the 
dotted line c. Such a force will not only pull d firmly against €, 
but will even null d in the direction of a. inste ad of h. thn« oA-naj-nof 
a to suae sfeul lurtuer over e. JBefore tnis can oe overcome a rnttst 
relax. But the hyper-extension is the result of the action of a. 
Consequently, the position shown is flatly opposed to finger-descent. 



INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 331 

In order for tliis to take place, a pre-relaxation of a is necessary. 
Not only that, but d, on account of the rounded head of e, may 
slide around its upper side, thus making any finger-descent impossible 
through the contraction of 6. Double-jointed pupils are well aware 
of this inability to move the finger until the “ kink ” is released. 
In the position of Fig, 184 force a is acting at an advantage, Z> 
at a decided disadvantage. For finger-stroke the conditions 
should be reversed. (See Fig. 103, showing angles of pull.) 

Since excessive range of motion is the result of a certain amount 
of “play” in the joint, adequate . contraction of the muscles 
controlling motion at this joint will help to overcome the “ loose- 
i^ess ”, By adopting, as normal, a hand-position requiring a 
degree of muscular contraction that makes hyper-extension at the 
joint impossible, the tendency to fall into the double-jointed 
position can be guarded against effectively. This does not, of course, 
change the bone or cartilagenouB formations at the joint, but merely 
holds the joint in normal position by appropriate muscular con- 
traction. For this reason it is decidedly inadvisable ever to carry 
the joint in the undesirable position. Balling the hand into a fist, 
firmly ; playing full chords fortissimo with firm arch ; and all 
firm grasping of round objects are effective means of forcing the 
arched hand-position and making hyper-extension improbable. 
To these may be added the familiar table exercise in which the hand 
is drawn from a flat position into an arched position by gradual 
contraction of the flexor muscles. This should be accompanied 
by reasonably firm pressure upon the table. In all these exercises, 
however, we do not alter the physiological cause of the double- 
jointedness, but, by developing the flexor muscles we make a 
moderately flexed position of the hand seem more natural than 
before. Tie basic difference remaius the same : in the normal hand 
the resistance near the extremes of range is interposed in a natural 
way by bone-formation, or inelasticity of tissue, or both ; in the 
loosely-jointed hand, this resistance must be interposed by muscular 
contraction. 

The joint which most frequently shows excessive range of motion 
is the second thumb-joint, the thumb-knuckle. The condition 
is sometimes restricted to this joint alone, although it is likewise 
not infrequently associated with the double-jointedness in the 
hand-knuckles of the other fingers, just described. In the case of the 
thumb it is even more annoying, for although the extreme extension 
of the fingers plays no real part in piano technique, the extension 
of the thumb is necessary in all octave and over-octave stretches. 
As a matter of fact it is necessary, in small hands, for stretches 



332 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

less an octave. As in the case of the fingers, forced flexion 
is the best means of overcoming this hyper-exfcension. Any flexion 
of the nail-joiht facilitates flexion of the middle-joint because the 
same set of muscles is involved and the tendon of the nail-joint 
passes under the middle-joint as well. Accordingly, by holding 
the tip of the thumb well bent-in (flexed) we indirectly make the 
breaking-in at the next joint more difficult. The correctness of this 
procedure is illustrated by the position assumed by the thumb 
if the tendon controlling flexion of the nail-joint is severed. When 
happens, the opposition to the breaking-in of the middle-joint 
is removed, and the break occnrs more readily and with corre- 
spondingly greater persistency. This I observed, particularly, in 
a case in which a deep cut had severed the flexor tendon and a 
foolish piece of surgery failed to permit it to knit. The tendency 
of the middle-joint to break-in after the wound had healed was 
double ; in fact the joint was habitually carried in this hyper- 
extended position (a modified form of Fig. 177a). The physiological 
cause is found in the extensor pollieiSi which extends the nail-joint 
of the thumb and then, by passing over the middle-joint tends 
to extend that also, and wiU extend it, even in normal conditions. 
Being unopposed by the flexor, this muscle naturally forces the 
joint to break. It is for this reason that the opposite contraction, 
maximal flexion of the nail-joint, is useful in correcting the break-in 
at the neighbouring joint. The particular case cited is concrete 
evidence of tendonous pull as a determinant of joint range. 

The double-jointedness of the fifth finger at the hand-knuckle 
may be corrected by substituting a straight finger-position for the 
curved one. In the chapter on Finger-Stroke the details of finger- 
position are analysed and the difference in lift between an extended 
and a curved finger is illustrated. Reference to Fig. 184 (double- 
jointed) shows that once beyond the straight-line position, the 
tendency of additional contraction of the extensor to cause the 
bones to “ slide ”, is marked. The line showing the muscular pull 
illustrates this. By keeping the finger extended, we can gain 
sufficient lift at the finger-tip for the desired tone-production without 
exceeding or perhaps eVen reaching the straight-line position at the 
hand-knuckle. Frequent reference has been made to skeletal 
position, the position taken so that the bones form a relatively 
straight line directed against the action of the piano-key. One 
instance is the flat and the curved finger-position. In Fig. 185a 
the nail-joint of the index finger is not flexed at all. The position 
of the bones in this finger shows that when the key is reached and 
the force acts vertically upward it will act at a maximum angle 



Plate XLIH 






INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 333 


of efficiency, whereas the finger-flexor, the tendon of which parallels 
the bone, is acting at a very poor angle. The key-resistance, 
therefore, will have a tendency to bend back the nail-joint. In 
c of the same figure, where the arched hand-position with curved 
fingCT is shown, the bone in the nail-joiat is vertical and the 
adjoining bone almost so. As a result, when key-resistance acts 
vertically upward, the bone-ends will be pushed together, thus 
relieving the muscles of a part of their contraction. The bone- 
position shows that merely curving the fingers may be sufficient 
to secure the firm nail-joint required in piano-playing, but not 
necessarily. 

Similar observations apply to the hand-knuckles. Li the flat 
hand with over-extended fiiiger, Fig. 1855, the skeletal assistance 
cannot be present, because the first phalanx is above the horizontal 
and the force-action of key-resistance is vertical. In the arched 
position, between metacarpal and first phalanx, the angle is less 
and the phalanx is lower, thus interposing to a modified extoit, the 
resistance of the metacarpal bone, besides letting the flexor act 
more efficiently. 

Note that in the case of the thumb we have no such skeletal 
considerations. This digit plays on its side, hence interposes a 
fairly rigid bone structure throughout its length. The only joint 
at which vertical movement can freely take place is the joint near 
the wrist. In the positions shown at a and c, a vertical upward force 
at the thumb-tip places a marked strain on the muscles controlling 
the joint near the wrist, on account of the leverage position. As the 
wrist is raised, the bone position changes to that shown at 6, resting 
the end of the metacarpal bone of the thximb more directly against 
the carpal bones of the hand. These,then,takecareofpart of the force 
of key-action. The raising of the wrist, accordingly, in pupils with 
weak hands, or evai in adults, when excessive tonal intensity is 
wanted, is the natural substitution of skeletal position for muscular. 
A photograph of such a position, with the hand ready to play 
fortissimo octaves is shown in Fig. 186. For the sake of comparison 
the muscular position for octaves. Fig. 187a, is added. Here, as 
the position of the fifth finger shows, the key-resistance is opposed 
by the muscles of the fifth finger. 6 in the same figure shows the 
fifth finger when the position in Fig. 186 is used. This finger does 
not even touch the key, the one tone of the octave then being 
played with both fourth and third fingers. In this position there is 
little danger of tearing a tendon mfortis^mo work, a result that can 
readily occur if position a be used. 



334 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 
Hand-Type and Style, 

It is quite natural, even necessary, that such differences as 
those which we have just been considering should affect the style 
of the player. Elsewhere I have mentioned the fact that pupils 
seldom adopt wrong fingering merely by chance. Their choice 
is determined by the greater ease, for them, of the fingering used. 
And this ease varies with the physiological structure of the hand. 
A few examples, taken at random from my own observations 
may serve as illustrations. The pupil whose hand is shown at a, 
Fig. 167, always plays with the third, fourth, and fifth fingers 
bunched, that is to say, without spread in these fingers. The exces- 
sive stretch between the thumb and the first finger plus the size 
of the hand make the plajdng of octaves with the first and third 
fingers, or even first and second, quite possible. And the pupil 
plays octaves, with the fourth and fifth, on a single key, or at 
times even with the third and fourth on a single key. It is an extreme 
case of the second physiological subdivision of the hand : thumb, 
index, and 3-4-6 (see D, Fig. 166). And for the same reason, any 
pianistic figure requiring abduction of these three fingers is unusually 
difficult for this pupil. 

The hand shown at/, Fig. 167, with the short thumb and short 
fifth finger, seldom employs either, if it can possibly be avoided. 
A left hand waltz accompaniment, for example, in which the low 
bass notes and one of the chord tones are usually played with the 
fifth finger and the thumb respectively, are, in this case, repeatedly 
played with the long fingers, especially the third ; first and fifth 
are not used at all unless the number of tones present forces their 
use. Here we have a division into three hand parts, the thumb 
facility and that of the fifth finger being insufficient to cause these 
digits to be used with normal freedom and frequency. Such a 
thumb difficulty, of course, becomes especially noticeable in scales 
and arpeggios. 

As an opposite case we may take the hand shown in Fig. 167 e. 
This pupil has no such difficulties. Spacing of chords, thumb- 
action, spreading of 3, 4, 6 yield readily to treatment. The hand 
at i, Fig. 167, has no difficulty in normal spacing on account of 
its width, but the shortness of the thumb and the unusual thickness 
of the thenar eminence make scale work, and especially arpeggio 
work, very difficult. 

Take again the case of a narrow hand. For such a hand, chord 
spacing demands wide abduction of the fingers (see Fig. 164). And 
such abduction is opposed to finger-flexion on account of the physio- 
logical structure of the hand. Accordingly, pieces such as the 



Plate XLV 



d 



Fig. 1 88. Anatomical differences in finger tips, showing various degrees 
of “ cushioning.” 


\Xofacep. 334 







INDIVmUAI. DIFFERENCES: THE HAND 335 

Butterfly Etude of Chopin, Op. 25, No. 9 , fatigue the hand very 
quicHy because both spread and very rapid and oft repeated 
finger-flexion are necessary. A wide hand, playing with less abducted 
fingers, fatigues much less quickly. Moreover, the additional finger 
spread which the narrow hand requires places an additional strain 
upon the wrist, for we have seen that j^er abduction and finger 
extension are associated. Should there be any pathological sensitive- 
ness in the wrist region to cystic formation, the condition will be 
aggravated by such stretching. I am at present working with a case 
in which the size and annoyance of a cyst can be definitely 
controlled by certain technical assignments. 

For such hands the question of appropriate fingering is of great 
importance. Any fibagering requiring abduction of the fibogers 
should be avoided when possible. The same rule applies to small 
hands. The introductory measures of Beethoven’s C-sharp Minor 
Sonata, Op. 27, already mentioned, should thus be fingered 1-3-6 
instead of 2-4-5 by such hands. 

Finger-Tip, 

The actual organ of tone-production on the piano is the finger- 
tip, and the physiological ^fferences in the size and formation 
of the hand involve the finger-tip as well. Two factors are of 
practical importance : the amount of cushion beneath the nail, 
and the projection of the nail beyond the end of the finger. Fig. 188a 
shows the side view of a well-rounded finger-tip ; Fig. 188 c and d 
a similar view of a tapering fibager. The former could be much 
compressed before the flat head of the bone-end makes the striking 
finger surface hard. The tapering fibager will stand less pressure, 
for there is too little flesh between skin and bone. The impact 
noises of the two, when a percussive attack is used, will differ some- 
what, being more marked for the tapering finger. 

This difference, however, is of less practical importance than 
the position of the nail itself. In c of Fig. 188, although the nail 
is cut short, it still protrudes beyond the flesh. And in d and e 
of Fig. 188 no cutting of the nail, as I happen to know from 
experience, can prevent this protrusion. Compare with this 6, of 
Fig. 188. Here the nail is not cut too short, and great pressure 
is forcing the vertical nail-joint against the hard surface. Yet 
the nail does not come into actual contact with this surface, as 
the reflection beneath shows. Accordingly, the finger positions 
adopted by the two tj^pes of fimger-ends should differ, for it is never 
advisable to let the fibager-nail strike the piano-key. The vertical 
nail-joint is impossible for the tapering finger. 



336 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

But since finger-position is one determinant of tone-quality 
(see Chapter XVII), this physiological difference will affect the tone- 
production itself. The pupil with tapering fingers will normally play 
more softly. Moreover, since in the extended finger the contraction 
of the finger-flexor differs from that used with a vertical nail-joint 
(see Fig. 105), the two types of finger require different muscular 
coordinations, and these affect not only the finger, but the hand and 
the arm as well. 

Hyper-extension, too, has its effect upon style. Since the fulcrum 
for the finger-stroke is at the hand-knuckle, and it is this joint at 
which the excess motion occurs, accurate control becomes more 
difiicult, and we find pupils with this excess range playing in a 
light, often unclear manner, or else, when fixation is attempted, 
resorting to excess fixation (really necessary on account of the normal 
excess extension) and forcing the tones beyond the desired intensity. 
The lightness of tone also results from the excess finger-lift which the 
fingers naturally adopt. In such cases it is doubly necessary to 
develop finger strength so as to minimize the finger-lift, and to 
direct attention to the down-stroke only. 



CHAPTEE XXIII 
Tone-Qualities 

Aftee all, the chief reason for varying the standard touch-forms 
which we have been considering, is the production of the desired, 
tone-quality. And in this quality business lies the cause of the 
countless polemic articles, pro and con, about the effect of touch 
upon tone. It is now defimtely known through both theory and 
experiment that all qualitative differences, excepting the variations 
in the noise-element, are quantitative differences. Teteel, the leader 
in Germany in the defence of this principle, has pointed out the 
intensity determinant a number of years ago, and sums it up in a 
law of djuamic or intensity relativity, as a result of which variations 
in or the relationship among the intensities of the tones is the 
fundamental determinant. This is true, if we add variations in the 
noise-element. 

In attempting to record tonal-qualities produced by players 
who aflSrm that they are not quantitative variations, we are faced 
with several difficulties. If the key-action is connected with a 
recording apparatus registering force-variations — ^and upon these 
the qualities depend — ^we necessarily change the normal key- 
resistance and thus deprive the player of the mechanism by which 
the tone is produced. If, on the other hand, we merely introduce 
the resistance at the bottom of key-depression, we shall fail to 
get the necessary variation, for tone is produced before the key is 
fully depressed. The apparatus used in most of the following 
experiments does not entirely overcome these difficulties, but by 
securing records in sufficient quantity, and by various other means 
such as the dynamograph, apart from the keyboard, as well as 
by learning from the introspection of the players themselves whether 
they felt that the tonal result had the desired quality, we can get 
an array of evidence that warrants definite conclusions. Then, too, 
we have the theoretical analysis, with which the experimental 
results have to agree. 

The apparatus used consisted of a series of steel springs, one 
attached to the inner arm of each key-lever through a range of 
several octaves of the keyboard. This permitted playing the keys 
as usual without destroying the tone. The resistance of the springs 



338 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

was adjustable so that a very slight increase over noriml key- 
resistance could be used as well as a resistance suflicient to withstand 
the force oi fortissimo work. To the keys themselves the aluminium 
recording levers already described (Fig. 110) were attached, 
corumunicating the key-movement in a magnified form to the 
smoked surface of a revolving drum. The adjustable spring 
resistance could vary so that pressure up to full depression was 
recorded. The magnification by the recording lever took care of 
very slight fiuctuations in key-movement. 

If tone-qualities depend upon force-variations, then we should 
get a distinct form of curve for each quality. Vertical displace- 
ment in the following figures means an increase in intensity, 
horizontal displacement means the duration of the stroke or of the 
pressure. In interpreting the curves we shall be obliged to touch 
upon certain psychological phases, in order to explain the connec- 
tion between the type of curve and the tone-quality. It is quite 
possible that several of the terms, as applied to tones, may not 
convey a clear meaning to each reader. In order to reduce this 
ambiguity to a minimum, I have selected only those frequently 
used by both pianist and auditor. Many others, in addition to those 
here given, were recorded, but in no case did the resulting curve 
conflict with the conclusions drawn from the records in this chapter. 

To avoid needless repetition on the description of each quality, 
the following legend is given. It applies to all figures in this 
chapter recordiug tone-qualities. 



A, ^adual varying increase in pressure as key is depressed 
(a to 0 ) ; gradual release of pressure as key ascends (6 to c) ; weak 
mtensity. 



TONE-QUALITIES 339 

B, the sharp angle at the beginning denotes a percussive touch, 
with sudden application of force {a to b ) ; gradual release of pressure 
{h to c ) ; moderate intensity. 

C, constant increase in pressure, relative slow key-speed (a to 
b) ; maintenance of pressure (b to c). Intensity same as B. 

D, percussive touch, great intensity (height of b) ; extremely 
short duration {a to c). 

The time-line in all the figures records fiftieth of seconds. All 
figures are to be read from left to right. 

SparJcUng. 

The curve for this quality is given in Eig. 190. Its characteristics 
are percussiveness, shown by the abrupt initial rise ; moderate 
to great intensity, shown in the amplitude or height of the curve ; 



\AAA/\/\/\/W\/\A/W 

Fig. 190. 

and extreme brevity in duration, shown by the small horizontal 
displacement. The word ‘‘ sparkling ” is borrowed from the 
visual field in which it denotes a light of relative Y great brilliance, 



aaaaaaaaa/ww^ 


TTfusc/e 


Fig. 191. 

little expanse, and short duration. These qualities are then trans- 
ferred to the auditory field necessitating the tone-production just 
described, high pitch taking care of the visual expanse. The 
Etincelles (Sparks) of Moszkowski is a musical illustration of this 
tone-quality. 



340 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

The muscular contraction producing such a tone-quality is, as 
we should expect, a rapid initial contraction of relatively short 
duration. It is iUustrated in Fig. 191 in which the key-line (reversed) 
is recorded only slightly magnified and showing the full key- 
depression, so that the time-relationship between muscular contrac- 
tion and the resting of the key upon its key-bed may be studied. 

The muscular relaxation takes place noticeably more slowly than 
key-release. This probably results from the fact that in the quick 
release of the hand from the key, the same muscles that brought 
about hand-descent act to prevent over-extension of the wrist 
in quick hand-ascent. As a result the relaxation is only partial, 
keeping hand-ascent under control. 

Velvety. 

A curve for this quality is given in Fig. 192. Its characteristics 
are : a gradual increase in pressure, beginning with a non-percussive 
attack; long duration, moderate or little intensity and gradual 


Tia. 192. 


release of pressure. When this quality is applied to a series of rapid 
tones, the gradual increase and release of pressure are absent, but 
the moderation of intensity and non-percussive attack remain. 
Moreover, when these attributes were altered, it was impossible 
to produce the desired tone-quality. The similarity of this touch- 
form to the touch-sensations of softness and smoothness produced 
by Ihe texture of velvet is obvious. Of course, none of the graduality 
of increase or release of pressure goes into the tone itself, and the 
lack of percussiveness does not mean a non-percussive attack of 
the string. Such assumptions are artistic illusions. Lack of 
percussiveness reduces the noise-element and thus permits a purer 
tone to be heard, but it does not afEect the tone itself. From a 
purely tonal standpoint a velvety tone is one of weak to moderate 
intensity and relatively long duration. In a sequence of tones this 
length of duration is replaced by equal intensities of the constituent 
tones and a high d^ee of legato. Short, detached tones cannot 
be described as velvety. 



TONE-QUALITIES 


341 


Crisp, 

This term is applied to tones whose intensity is at least moderate 
and marked in relation to their duration. A typical dynamograph 
for this touch-form is seen in Fig. 193. 

In this case the player was asked to produce also a tone of the 
same intensity but “ lacking the bite ” as he aptly described it. 
a in the figure is the crisp ” tone, 6 a tone of equal intensity but 
lacking the crisp ’’ quality. The difference is in the duration, 
more particularly in the release. In a the pressure is very quickly 
released to the zero point (from dto e)\ in 6 it is more gradually 
released {d to e), the descending line being less steep than in a. 
If pedal be used, the release of pressure does not affect the tone 
and this continues to sound, just as it would if pressure on the 



key continued. Crispness, therefore, caimot exist tonally, when pedal 
is used unless the latter be taken staccatissimo. The fact that 
the feeling of crispness persists for the player, regardless of the 
pedal, is another illustration of projecting a muscular condition 
into ike tonal results. For the listener it does not exist, unless he 
reads the quality into the tone by watching the arm-release of the 
player. 

I cannot refrain, here, from calling attention again to the need 
of getting away from eye-impressions in any analysis of auditory 
tonal qualities. So many qualities are read into the piano tone 
by the eye, and this is so often done, that it is very dijSicult for 
even an experienced listener to dissociate the two sense-impressions. 



342 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIAJSTO TECHNIQUE 
BeU4ike. 

Tones on the piano are frequently described as “ bell-like 
A curve for such a touch-form is that at a, Fig. 194, in which 
b represents a curve for a tone of equal intensity but lacking the 
bell-like quality. This quality has, as its chief characteristics, 
a percussive beginning, moderate or great intensity, and shortness 
in duration, a description that fits very closely the manner of 
producing tone on a bell. The player imitates the impact of the 
clapper against the bell edge and its rebound from it. Here, too, 
the use of the pedal will weaken the bell-like quality for the au^tor, 
because the latter does not “hear” the impact pressure and 
subsequent release. The quality may well persist in the imagina- 
tion of the player, reenforced, as this is, by the kinesthetic sensa- 
tions of tone-production. Bell-like thus becomes closely related 

\/\AAAAAaAAAAAA/W\/\W 



Pig. 194. 




to crispness, the similarity being sho-wn by the parallel outlines of 
the two cmves. 

Dry. 

_ Dry , so far as I have been able to learn, when applied to a tone, 
IS used either in the sense of uninteresting or to convey the im- 
pression of lack of colour. Colour in the piano tone-complex 
resulte from the presence of the tonal elements. It is obscured 
by ■^e predominance of the noise-elements : finger-key impact, 
key-M impact, hammer-string impact, hammer-check impact 
and fncrion among the action parts. These elements cannot be 
shoTO directly by the method of recording here used, but their 
ettect may be seen m the percussiveness (noise) and small amount 



TONE-QUALITIES 343 

of intensity (tone) of a curve for such a quality, Fig. 195a. The 
sharp rise in the line indicates the percussive touch, and the relatively 
small amplitude (height) shows a tone of little intensity. It is a 
type of touch in which the impact noises relatively overshadow 
the tonal elements. 

The duration is variable, as shown in the two illustrations at the 
top of Fig. 195, but the relationship between noise and tone may 
remain in spite of variations in duration. The essential characteristic 
is the increased ratio of the noise-elements to the absolute amount 
of tone. With great intensity the tonal-element necessarily increases 
and since its duration is much greater than that of the various 
noise components, the ratio between noise and tone would change, 

CL ^ 

J — V A- 


vVVVVWWVVVWVWVWVWWV^ 

6 

^ifscie 

Fig. 195. 


and with it the quality of the sound-complex. No comparison 
in amplitude can be made between the two figures since in Fig. 195a 
the key-depression was magnified approximately 6 to 1, whereas 
in Fig. 1956 the key-depression is actual displacement. This 
difference applies also to other figures in which muscular contrac- 
tions are given. All percussive tone-production on the piano is 
accompanied by noticeable noises, which cease after tone-beginning. 
Therefore, if the tone also ceases at this moment, the noise is 
sujBBicient to overshadow the tone, since with an increase in tone, 
goes a necessary increase in noise. This is the type of touch used 
for the two closing chords in Debussy’s Minstrels, which the com- 
poser has marked sec ” or dry. The muscular reaction to a 
dry staccato ” is interesting. A dry staccato, from the definition 
given in the preceding paragraph, intensifies, still more, the 



344 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

preponderance of noise over tone. The noise-elements in tone-pro- 
duction upon the piano are largely present only at tone-beg in n in g. 
After tone-beginning the tonal elements are present, with no noise 
until tone-ending. If we produce a dry staccato, therefore, we 
rob the sound of the tonal value of duration. We reduce tone to 
a TniTiiTT^mrij without in any way reducing the noise-elements. 
Fig. 195& shows a very marked muscular contraction and just a bit 
of key-depression. The relaxation period is considerably longer than 
the initial contraction period, and especially longer than the 
duration of key-depression. The rise in contraction after key- 
depression may also result from the contraction of the muscle 
as an inhibitor of hand-ascent. The rather marked amount of 
muscular contraction, and the extremely small bit of key-movement 
makes this touch-form similar to the vibrato fixation or inhibition. 

Brittle. 

Brittleness is associated with sharp edges, and absence of 
plasticity. A brittle tone, accordingly, should be one of abrupt 
beginning, moderate to great iatensity, and variable duration. 
Fig. 196 gives an example of the dynamic curve obtained with 



such a touch-form. The tone-beginning is very abrupt, and the 
amplitude large. The abruptness of the beginning plus the intensity 
give the tone its necessary sharpness. It was impossible to produce 
a brittle tone for the weak dynamic degrees ; nor could it be done 
by using a non-percussive touch, except when the entire arm was 
stiffened and jerked into the key. This spread of muscular con- 
traction is itself an indication of the intensity needed for a tone of 
such quality. The abruptness plaj^ over into the release which 
in Fig. 196 is as abrupt as the beginning. This abruptness of release 
can only be transferred to the key in an apparatus arranged as in 



TONE-QUALITIBS 345 

these experiments. The lack of elasticity in key-movement makes 
it impossible to bring the key up more rapidly than its own momen- 
tum, by releasiug the finger more rapidly. That is to say, the key- 
ascent itself was not as abrupt as the descent of the line in Fig. 196. 
This descent shows an extremely rapid release of pressure, and 
consequent withdrawal of the hand from the key. The key-ascent, 
however, does not parallel the hand-ascent. Under key-release 
this difference is illustrated. (Fig. 204.) 


A “ singing ’’ tone, as its name implies, is one in which duration 
plays the most important part. Its intensity will be moderate, 
its beginning as smooth and non-ejaculated as possible. A tone 
of very weak intensity does not carry ” on the piano, on account 
of the marked diminumdo quality of all sustained piano tones. These 
characteristics are shown in Fig. 197a which is a typical curve 



vtaltfe — - — ’ 

Bio. 197, 


for a singing tone : moderate amplitude, long duration, and 
gradual attack and release, as a result of wliictL percussion and the 
abrupt, noisy, tone-beginning are absent. All singing tones tihnt 
I recorded were produced by a relaxed arm, and in all cases lihe 
pressure was. either sustained or increased after tone-production, 
although the maintenance or iucrease, of course, could not actually 
afEect the tone, which diminished Just as rapidly as if less pressure 
— Just enough to keep the key depressed— had been used. 

A farther instance of the dynamic curve for a singing tone is 
given in Kg. 206 where the actual range of key-movement is also 
shown and compared with the great amount of imagiaary tone- 
control. 

The muscular contraction in the production of a singing tone 
naturally parallds the imaged duration and shading of the tone. 
Li the figure Just referred to, the dynamograph registos an increase 
in pressure after the key is fully depressed. Accordingly, when 



346 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

we record tlie contraction of the muscles, we should find a similar 
increase in contraction. One ty^pical curve together with the key- 
movement is given in Fig. 1976. The greatest height in the curve 
of muscular contraction (at a) is not reached until well after the 
key has been fully depressed. In fact, it is closer to key-release 
than key-depression. All this increase is wasted effort, of course, 
so far as its effect upon the tone is concerned. Nor do we find 
good pianists normally using much of it. It is a favourite device 
of the emotional amateurs who read all sorts of pathos and romance 
into the long-suffering piano tone. In the record in question, the 
key was actually depressed through arm-weight, without marked 
contraction of the flexor muscle. This contracted later. 

Repression. 

The production of tones through considerable muscular repression 
demands a word of explanation on account of the frequency with 
which it is used in the playing of some pianists. The entire muscular 
system of fingers, hand, arm, and shoulder is placed in a state of 
hyper-tension, and either enough of an added stimulus is given 
to the appropriate muscles to cause the fingers to reach the keyboard 
and to produce tone, or the trunk and abdominal muscles are 
relaxed and the entire trunk lowered sujQ&ciently through gravity. 
At times the fingers rest upon the key-surface beforehand. (See 
Fig. 8, The Skeleton.) Thus a staccato tone or chord is played with 
a rigid hand, arm, and shoulder in the belief that this muscular 
conation will produce a tone of a quality differing from a tone of 
similar intensity and duration produced with a relaxed arm. Before 
illustrating this touch-form, I must call attention to the fact that 
such a state of rigidity is not to be mistaken for the normal and 
necessary rigidity which varies with the tonal intensity, examples 
of which have already been given in sufficient number. In this 
case we have maximum rigidity for the production of a tone of 
relatively little intensity. When the force of such a touch is 
recorded, and also that of a touch of apparently the same intensity 
but produced without repression, we get what was to be expected : 
a softer tone, the typical dynamic relation between relaxation and 
rigidity, and more noise for the rigid condition. The difference 
is shown in Fig. 198 on a highly magnified scale, so that the 
differences in height of the two curves, which reflect differences 
in tonal intensity may be readily seen, even when these differences 
are very minute, a shows the “ repressed ” or stiff form, 6 the 
more relaxed. The apparent difference in quality is again one in 
intensity. I can see no gain in this rigid touch. It consumes much 



TONE-QUALITIES 347 

energy that is entirely wasted since the meclianical object of 
physiological rigidity : force of stroke, is neutralized by the 
repression. It may possibly convey to the player an intensity of 
feeling, but this cannot carry over into the sound. Its only value 
lies in the speed of getting away from the key, as in staccatissimo. 
Here it may be useful : the vertical release of a in Fig. 198 illustrates 
the point. But when it is used for tones of even slight duration 
it is tonally and muscularly useless, hence must be classed as an 
incoordinated movement. When we consider the great difference 
in muscular coordination here represented, it is easy to under- 



stand the qualitative difference assigned by the player to the tone. 
The intensity of the repression, including at times the cessation of 
all breathing, so as to fix the chest cavity firmly, may readily be 
imagined. The musculature system of the entire body, at least 
that of the trunk and upper limbs, is fixed in a state of hypertension, 
which is largely maintained through the tone-production itself. 
The tonal intensity desired is so small, however, that a bit of relaxa- 
tion, let us say in the trunk region, is all that is needed. Such 
muscular states, as the James-Lange theory of emotions shows, 
are inseparably connected with the emotional states ; in fact, 



348 TOUCH-FOBMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

they are the emotional states, in many instances. Accordingly, 
the player reads these emotional qualities into the tone itself. 
The auditor, however, especially if he be listening with closed eyes, 
gets nothing more than a relatively soft, short tone. No element 
of repression exists for him. 

Surface Tone. 

A form of touch quite common among inexperienced pupils is 
the iype generally described as a surface touch. The pupil, as we 
say, fails to get down into the key. The muscular reason for this 
failure is that the contraction (flexor) which sends the finger down 
to the key ceases before tone is produced. As a result, the key 
retards the finger partially or completely. If the contraction of 
the flexor muscles continued after the finger touched the key-surface, 
the key would be depressed and the “ surface ’’ quality of the tone 
would be lost. 



91 


I’m. 199. 

This may be demonstrated by means of the mechanical arm and 
a spring balance. When the part of the arm corresponding to the 
finger is permitted to fall upon the balance of its own weight (which 
in this case is the mechanical equivalent of muscular contraction 
before the key is reached), the curve at Fig. 199, which traces 
the movement of the balance level, results. The impact is momen- 
tary, and, on the principle of action and reaction, the balance 
pushes back the finger, reaching its level after a few oscillations. 
When, instead, the appropriate muscles are contracted at the 
moment of finger-key impact, the curve at h results. The initial 
fluctuation is the typical percussive adjustment, but the point o 
is considerably lower that the similar point in a. Pressure is 
sustained. If the finger be permitted to rest upon the key-surface 
and the flexor muscles are then contracted, we get the curve at c. 
The percussive jerk has been eliminated, the key is more slowly 



349 


TONE-QUALITIES 

depressed, shown by the slant in the descending line m to n, as 
compared to similar points in the other two curves ; and the key 
is held depressed as at 6. (The chance difference in the duration of 
this depression between 6 and c does not affect the problem.) 
Similar results are obtained when we record the muscular con- 
traction. Kg. 200 a shows the contraction and the key-movement 
for a “ surface ’’ tone ; 6 the same for a good, musically satisfactory 
tone, one lacking the “ surfacy ” quality. In a the muscular 



\A/\AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA/^ 
Fig. 200. 


contraction takes place before and up to key-finger impact, the 
initial force depressing the key. After that point no further muscular 
contraction occurs. In &, on the contrary, the greater part of the 
muscular contraction takes place during the key-descent, since the 
line representing muscular contraction continues to rise as the key 
is depressed. The part before key-depression is naturally similar 
for both touches, since this phase of the movement is present in 



Fig. 201. 


either case. The percussiveness — shown by the break in key- 
movement (see arrow. Pig, 200) — ^and its absence in the “ good ” 
tone-production are proof of the presence and absence, respectively, 
of the finger-key impact noise. The initial maximal contraction 
of the muscle in the surface quality may be seen more clearly in 
Pig. 201, where the key-line also shows lack of maintained pressure. 

In this muscular contraction at the moment of impact and its 
subsequent use during key-descent lies the nucleus of the problem 



350 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

of tone*production and tone-control on tlie piano. It is this con- 
traction that is responsible for such pedagogical expressions as 
“ sensitized finger-tips ”, “ feel it in your finger weight the 
key”, and others. Instead of stressing finger-lift as seen by the 
eye, the teacher should stress finger-drop as felt by the muscles. 
The attention of the pupil should be directed toward the gauging 
of key-xesistance as it affects tone, not to the lift of the finger, 
away from the key. In each instance of undesirable tone-quality 
that I tested from this angle, I found an incorrectly timed muscular 
contraction. In some instances the contraction took place too soon ; 
in others, too late : after the key had reached its key-bed. The 
best tone-quality for slow-tone production, measured by the tonal 
beauty of the individual tone, is produced by a minimal muscular 
contraction at the beginning of key-descent and an increase of 
this to the desired intensity during key-descent. 

Once again the teaching of this is helped not by assisting the 
finger or hmd in its descent, but by interposing additional resistance, 
either by a slight upward pressure against the outer top-surface 
of the key, or better by inserting a small spring under the key 
while the pupil depresses it. This brings key-resistance forcibly 
to the mind of the pupil and results in the added muscular contrac- 
tion during key-descent upon which tone-control depends. The 
moment the key-bed has been reached, however, partial muscular 
relaxation should set in, since the added pressure is no longer 
needed. 

Pearly, 

The word pearly as applied to piano tone is famihar to all pianists 
as the “ jeu perl6 ” of the French and the “ Perlende Gelaiifigkeit ” 
of the Germans. When we record this touch-form we find that the 


|WVVM/V\ 

Fia. 202. 

pearly character is the result primarily of a non-legato touch. Each 
tone is as distinct from its neighbours as the tempo permits, while 
the intensity is, under normal conditions, fairly constant, and seldom 
great. The ingredients that go to produce the pearly tone-quality 
are non-legato, dynamic steadiness, rather weak intensity, and 
fairly great speed. This points to a transfer from the visual field 



TONE-QUALITIES 351 

wliere a ‘‘ string of pearls ” presents muct the same sensorial 
characteristics. A dynamograph record of this quality is given in 
Fig. 202. The curve does not show finger-movement but only 
fluctuations in the force of finger-strokes. The relatively small 
amplitude of the curves records the weak intensity, the evenness 
of their crests illustrates the even dynamic degrees, and the drop 
in the line between each two strokes shows absence of weight- 
transfer and indicates the non-legato character of the touch. 

While experimenting with this touch-form, I came across an 
interesting effect of fingering upon the legato or non-legato character 
of the passage. If the following sequence of notes be played with 
the fingering above them, a non-legato (pearly) tone-quality will 
result. This is explained in the chapter on W'eight-Transfer where 
speed of finger-lift is shown to be one determinant of legato. If 
the fingering below the notes be used, without instructing the subject 
as to any change in tone-quality, the result will usually be a more 



Fia. 203. 


legato touch, the dynamograph-record showing noticeably less 
vertical fluctuations between strokes. The difference results from 
the fact that in the second fingering no great speed of finger-lifb is 
involved. Such instances show the need for selecting a fingering 
that will facilitate the musical effect of a particular passage. If, for 
example, the descending chromatic thirds in the second cadenza 
of Liszt’s A-flat Liehestraum are to produce a “ pearly ” or even 
sparkling effect ”, the use of the foxirth finger on black and white 
keys is desirable. If, on the other hand, a more legato effect be 
desired, the third finger can be used to advantage on the black keys. 

I shall add a quotation that is particularly interesting at this 
point. It is taken from a letter which Beethoven wrote to Carl 
Czerny concerning the piano lesson of Beethoven’s nephew Carl. 
He writes : — 

“ With passages such as these : 



I like at times all fingers to be xxsed, also in the following : 



352 


TOUCH-^'ORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 


so that they may be played in gliding style ! Certainly 
they sonnd, as it is said ‘played in a pearly’ (manner), 
with few fingers, or ‘ like a pearl but at times one wants a 
jewel of a different kind.” The quotation is remarkable because 
it comes from a musician who, least of all, might be expected to 
analyse the details of touch-forms, being so completely engrossed 
in the artistic effect of the whole. And yet Beethoven, in a few 
words, gets at the bottom of at least these two tonal qualities, 
specifying gliding as legato, and pearly as non-legato. 

So long as the speed at which the passage is played is not too 
great, repetition of finger will normally produce a non-legato 
touch more readily than change of finger. But, when this speed 
reaches a certain point, the stiffness characteristic of all very 
rapidly repeated movements (see Chapter XVI, Finger Staccato) 
begins to set in. By lengthening the finger sequence, and thus 
necessarily reducing the speed of actual finger-repetition, we 
eliminate the danger of stiffness to a certain extent. This difference 
finds its application in the fingering of the ornamental figures, 
such as the mordent and the turn. Here a change of fingering 
facilitates the clearness of the execution. The inverted mordent 
C D C , for example, is better played 1-3-2 or 2-4-3 than 1-2-1 
or 2-3-2. With finger-repetition on the same key the stiffness 
which sets in whenever a rapid alternating movement is made, 
frequently interferes with the clear, delicate performance of the 
ornament. Finger-repetition with a change of key does not have 
as marked an effect. 

Key-Release, 

Tone-quality is also affected by the time of key-release. But 
not by the manner of key-release, since tone-cessation begins 
only when the damper touches the string. The effect which varia- 
tions in finger-speed have on key-descent, coupled with the widely 
accepted, but erroneous notion of elasticity in key-action, has 
caused players and teachers to conclude that the speed of key-a^ent 
can be controlled by speed of finger-ascent. Up to a certain point 
—the speed at which the key ascends freely as the shorter end of 
the key-lever— -this is true. Beyond that point the speed of key- 
ascent cannot be increased. We may jerk the finger away from the 



TONE-QUALITIES 353 

key as rapidly as possible, but the key will take its time coming 
up, and the finger, in such a case, has left the key-surface well 
before the key has fully ascended. This difference in the speed of 
key-ascent and that of finger-ascent is clearly shown in Fig. 204, 
where a is the curve of the ascending finger-tip, and b the curve 
of the ascending key. The difference in speed is seen in the difference 
in the slant of the lines. If key-speed equalled finger-speed the key 
would ascend along the dotted line. In this particular record the 
finger-speed was three times as great as the speed of key-ascent. 
Needless to say, under such conditions the player has no control 
whatever over key-ascent. 

The result is that the staccato tone is never, m its louder degrees, 
as short m sound as it feels to the player. By lifting the finger or 
hand from the key with an extremely rapid movement, the player 




Fig. 204 . 


creates the illusion — ^for himself as well as for the listener— of 
equally extreme brevity of tone. In reality the tone is not as short 
as the finger-stroke. If we add to this the reverberation properties 
of the typical studio or especially of the concert hall, we must 
conclude that the pleasure derived from the brevity of staccato, 
the true staccatissimo is an auditory illusion, resulting from the 
kinesthetic and visual sensations of the player, and from the visual 
sense of the auditor. It is another instance of the eye determining 
tonal quality. 

The absence of elasticity or rebound in the key-ascent is clearly 
shown when we record the movement of a normal piano-key and one 
in which the rebound is added by attaching a rubber band to the 
key so that depression of the key extends the band. In this case 
elastic rebound is present. The two key-movements are given 
in Fig. 206 : a, for the elastic return ; 6, for the normal key. 
The asymmetry of b and the symmetry of a show that in 5 the ascent 



354 TOUCH-rOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

is independent of tlie speed of descent, tlxe line being both irregular 
and difiereutly slanted from descent, whereas in a ascent is equal 
in speed to descent. In Fig. 205 the ascent of a is just twice as fast 
as that of 6. 



VWWW’ 

TlA 

Fig. 205. 


Elements of Tone-QmUties. 

The qualities selected for illustration have been chosen from 
many that were recorded because the terms are more familiar than 
some others. The following deductions, however, are based not 
only on the records given, but on all that were taken, there having 
been no noticeable exception in any case. 

Tones possessing musical quality, apart from suggesting associa- 
tions wi^ sensations and perceptions in other fields than the 
field of hearing, invariably are tones relatively free from the noise 
elements, with the tonal elements of moderate intensity. They 
are, further, of moderate or prolonged duration. In other words, 
they represent stimuli along the mid-range of the scales of tonal 
attributes : intensity and duration. Such sensations, as experiment 
has shown, are, other things equal, more pleasant than similar 
stimuli at or near the extremes of range. A moderately high or 
low tone, unassociated with oth^ tones or non-auditory images, 
is normally more pleasant than an extremely high or an extremely 
low tone ; a tone of moderate intensity, is, under the same conditions, 
normally more pleasant than a very loud or a very soft tone.^ 

When we bring association into play, however, these reactions 
usually change. A tone or chord played with a percussiveness and 
at an intensity at which tonal beauty is decidedly impaired, may 
readily be reacted to pleasantly if, for example, it marlrff the climax 

^ 0. Ortmann, Types of Reaction to Music. 



TONE-QUALITIES 355 

of a phrase, or awakens associations the strength of which outweighs 
the purely tonal sensations. The strongest and, perhaps, the most 
misleading of such associations, so far as the single tone is concerned, 
is that between tone and touch, as a result of which the player reads 
qualities into the tone which cannot exist physically. All such 
tonal differences must be differences in intensity, duration, and 
in combmations of tone and noise. Since this point is denied by 
many pianists the actual curves for various qualities have been 
given in the figures of this chapter. They show, without a single 
exception, that the three elements that make up tone-quality at 
any one pitch are intensity, duration, and the relationship of noise 
to tone. Moreover, these three elements are sufficient to account 
for aU tonal qualities, for some directly, for others through the 
process of association. This relationship is pointed out here in a 
rudimentary sort of way, and the reason given as to how and why 
certain combinations of the three elements produce similar sensa- 
tions in other fields. The details of this phase are primarily psycho- 
logical questions, and, as such, fall beyond the scope of the present 
investigation. I might point out, however, that the associations 
can readily be explained if we grant the existence of sensation- 
form an attribute of sensation, the reality and the importance 
of which I have attempted to demonstrate elsewhere.^ 

Tone CoTnbinations, 

Objection is often made, and somewhat justifiably so, to the 
assignment of tonal qualities in the single tone. And in the experi- 
ments made, this objection was frequently voiced by the pianists 
making the records. However, if the qualities assigned by the 
player to a tone passage do not exist in the single tone, that very 
fact is definite proof that the so-caUed tonal-qualities are not inherent 
qualities at all, but result from dynamic and agogic variations 
among a succession of tones. Pedal effects, which are qualitative 
as well as quantitative, are independent of key-naanipulation. 

At the same time, even these differences among many tones 
can be shown to result entirely from the three physical variants 
mentioned. The differences, as a result of which we speak of a 
Mozart, a CSiopin, or a Debussy style, on the piano — ^I exclude 
here, of course, the differences of the style of the composition 
itself— are differences in the intensity and the legato of the touch. 
An analysis and illustrations of some of these differences will be 
found in the chapter on Style. 


1 Sensorial Basis of Music Appreciation^ op. cit. 



356 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 
The Play of Imagery. 

It is evident from tke analysis of tte various qualities wMcli we 
have been consideriog that a considerable difference exists between 
the physical sound produced by the pianist and its psychological 
resultant. Differences in quantity of sound are interpreted as 
differences in quality ; qualities are read into sound that cannot 
possibly exist there. A player declare^ — ^and justifiably so — that 
a certain movement produces a certain tone-quality ; and the 
listener maintains — with equal justification — that the tone-quality 
does not exist. The difference results from the fact that, for the 
player, the tone-quality is — ^I am afraid, unfortimately — ^inseparable 
from the physiological sensations of the movement of tone-produc- 
tion. The entire muscular system is made tense — ^but a little of the 
potential force is used to produce a tone — ^and a repressed ” tone 
of specific softness results. But as a matter of fact it does not. 
Another pianist can produce precisely the same tone with relatively 
relaxed muscles. And a listener, not seeing the muscular adjust- 
ment, wiU get the feeling of neither repressed nor relaxed tone- 
production. Strangely enough, imagination is an accepted and 
much sought after factor in aU artistic playing, yet its operation 
in the case of a single tone is often flatly denied and ignored. Where, 
then, does it begin to function, at two, three, or four tones ; at a 
phrase, or at a period ? The same power of imagery that conjures 
up pictures for a composition — ^I think at the moment of 
Moussorgsky’s : Exposition Pictures, and Debussy’s “ Jardin Sous 
la Pluie ” — is at work for the single tone. In the preceding paragraphs 
we have the evidence and an attempt at explaining the causes for 
the umgeiy. The transfer among various senses, upon which 
this imagery is based is, I feel, one of the safest postulates that 
psychology can make in explaining imagination. Particularly 
because it assumes a sensorial basis common to all senses. 

Although such qualities as velvety, sparkling, brittle, and singing, 
all involve a play of imagery when applied to piano-tone, the 
extent of this play is most convincingly shown when we record 
tone-production on an instrument in winch the key-depression is 
not restricted, and compare the result with the production of a 
similar tone on a normal key-action. The instrument here used was 
a dynamograph similar to the one used in recording the other 
qualities described in this chapter. A so-called ‘‘ good si n gi ng ” 
tone was produced by the accepted form of weight-touch. With 
the key unrestricted in descent the line a, Fig. 206, was produced. 
This means a relatively slow, steady increase of pressure up to a 
maximum, and a gradual release of weight during key-ascent. The 



TONE-QUALITIES 357 

release of weight is slower than the addition of weight, since the 
apex of the curve is to the left of the centre. This curve represents 
the ideal ’’ tone-production for a single-tone of musical value. 
(Numerous records by various pianists were made, of course.) Then 
the instrument was set so that the key-descent was limited to the 
normal three-eighths of an inch as fomid in the piano. It produced 
the curve 6, heavy line. This begins the same as a, but at h all further 
control is lost until c is reached. The shaded part of the figure, 
in other words, three-fourths of the dynamic variation (from 
h to to c) thus exists only in the imagination of the player. He 
controls the key through but one-fourth of the dynamic range and 
less than one-fourth of the duration range. 

The remaining three-fourths and more represent purely physio- 
logical movement, which is then, through the play of imagery, 
transferred to the tone itself. Erom a mechanical standpoint, 
and from a tonal standpoint as well, the entire shaded portion is 



Fig. 206. 


wasted work. Emotional efi^ect upon the player may justify the 
waste, but it does not justify the teaching of the tonal quality as 
existing in the tone itself. 

Illusions are not restricted to any one tone-quality. Its presence 
in stacmtissimo I have already mentioned, and it functions as well 
in all touches in which the variations occur before the key is reached, 
and after it is lifted, and, at times in others, where the finger-position 
is used to determine tone-quality. Frequently, for example, the pedal 
is taken on the last note of a phrase in order to avoid an abrupt 
tone-ending as the hand and arm are lifted from the key. A person 
not lookiug, gets none of the lift or the phrasing ; but a person 
seeing the movement, learns the phrasing and in consequence reacts 
differently. The player, feeling the plnasing as well as seeing it, 
reacts differently again. Examples such as these will occur in 
number to anyone analysing the actual facts of tone-production. 
They are most convincingly shown when we sit through a piano 
recital with eyes closed. The experienced pianist may even then 
comprehend the phrasing, particularly if the material played be 



358 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

familiar. But it may uot be tbe phrasing actually used by the 
player ; it will probably be that imaged by the listening pianist 
whose keyboard experience supplies him with a rich source of 
kinesthetic and visual memories upon which he constructs his 
imaged phrasing. 

Melodic Accentuation, 

Closely connected with the question of tone-qualities is that of 
melodic quality or intensification. In its simplest form, where a 
melody is played in one hand and an accompaniment in another, 
the relationship is admittedly one of simple intensity. Conditions 
become more involved when the melody and accompaniment 



are played simultaneously by the same hand, as in the first move- 
ment of Beethoven’s C-sharp minor Sonata, popularly known as 
the Moonlight Sonata, or in the familiar Melody in F of Rubinstein. 
Absolute simultaneity is demanded, but is probably seldom actually 
achieved by the player. Since the melody key must descend more 
rapidly than the accompaniment key (for tonal intensity depends 
entirely upon the key-speed at the moment of escapement) the 
mom^t of tone-production will differ unless the key-descents be 
so adjusted that earlier begi^ng neutralizes the lag of the slower 
key-movement. Such an adjustment is extremely difficult, because 
the rigidity of the two knuckles producing the tones must differ, 
and experiment has shown that such a condition is opposed to 
accurate control. The more natural inference is that in melodic 
accentuation of the type here discussed, the keys actually do not 
inove precisely together, and that the tones do not sound absolutely 
simultaneously, the difference bemg too slight to be noticed in 



TONE-QUAUTIES 359 

sounds that are sustained. The accented tone will then be the first 
to sound. Kg. 207 indicates that this relationship exists, a repre- 
sents •(Jie curve of key-movement for Ike unaccented tone, 6, that for 
the accented, melody tone. The points of upward deflection are the 
beginnings of the key-descents. The distances have been magnified 
and the direction reversed, a rise in the line indicating key-descent. 
The time-line is given in thousandths of seconds, and, in this 
particular instance the melody key preceded the accompaniment 
key by three one-thousandths of a second, and since its descent 
was more rapid (the line in 6 is steeper) tone-production differed 
at least by this amount. Such a difference is too small to distinguish 
with tones and, accordingly, the tones are heard as simultaneous. 
The fact that the kej^ travel at different speeds, shown in the figure 
by the difference in the slant of the lines, shows the physiological 
principle underl 3 dng tone-accentuation at work. 

If such an accentuation be produced by finger-stroke, difierences 
in finger-speed will be necessary, the greater finger-speed being 



— ■■ a 




'TFFTT 

Era. 208. 


used for the accented tone. Such speed, as we shall see later, may 
be attained by a greater finger-lift. But here the danger of not 
reaching the keys simultaneously is present. The alternative is 
to start the two fingers at the same level, but to contract the flexor 
of the accented finger more strongly than that of the other finger. 
This is a fine coQrdmation and excessively difidcult for young 
beginners. 

The problem is somewhat simplified if the arm can be used in 
tone-production. Li that case the knuckle as fulcrum of the 
accented tone, is made sufihciently rigid, while that for the unaccented 
tone is held relaxed. The descending arm then gives sufficient speed 
to the accented key whereas a moderate finger-stroke will take 
care of the less intensity of the accompaniment tone. An exercise 
su(k as in Fig. 208, is very useful ia teaching this coordination. 
Here the first, second, and third finger (others ad Wbitum) play with 
a light staccato while tihe melody tone is held. The fimger-staccato 
forces movement in the hand-knuckles, thus eliminating the 
sympathetic rigidity in these joints normally spreading from the 


360 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

fixed knuckle of tke melody finger. Once tins combination has been 
acquired — ^movement in the accompaniment knuckles with fixed 
melody knuckle— the staccato can then be transferred gradually 
into the sostenvto touch. 

The popular phrase of “ throwing the arm-weight back of the 
melody finger ” does not accurately express the mechanics of the 
movement, although it does embody the correct principle. What 
takes place is the shifting of the arm and hand into tiie skeletal 
straight-line position, so that an extension of the skeletal axis of 
the fore-arm passes through the melody finger. Or else excess 
muscular fixation approximates the skeletal position. This position 
is that applied in cases of maximal force-transfer, of which numerous 
instances have already been given. At the same time to the degree 
that the melody finger is thrown into line with a rigid structure, 
the other fingers are thrown proportionately out of line, with the 
resulting loss in force-transfer. 

The skeletal distribution is not the only element of difference. 
In order to make the dynamic contrast between melody and 
accompaniment sudficiently marked, an additional difference in the 
degree of fixation of the various hand-knucHes is needed, which will 
permit the key-speed of the accompaniment to be reduced to any 
auditory degree. The problem of the normal pupil is not the 
difficulty of stressing the accented tone, but rather of doing that 
without stressing the simultaneous accompaniment tones. And this 
difference is one of hand-knucMe fixation, not arm-weight. 

Fingering, 

Since this fixation varies as the distance between the playing 
fingers varies, and since the spread of activity from each finger to 
its adjoining fingers is constantly present (see Action and Reaction), 
it is obviously more difficult, normally, to use adjacent fingers for 
marked simultaneous dynamic differences than non-adjacent fingers. 
The physiological hand-division (p. 314) serves as a fundamental 
selection. The fifth-finger is best adapted to melodic accentuation 
with simultaneous tones on account of its own group of muscles, 
contraction of which mfluences the other fingers least. The more 
fundamental separation of the thumb is hindered somewhat by 
the direction of action, which is opposed to the natural thumb- 
movements, these being horizontal, rather than vertical. The index 
finger is useful when the lay-out of the piano passage permits its 
use. In general, adjacent fingers should be avoided, 2 and 4, or 3 
and 6, being preferable to 3 and 4, or 4 and 5, even if the piano-keys 
played are adjacent keys, because the spread of tension from the 



TONE-QUALITIES 361 

fourth to the second knuckle or fifth to third, is less than that 
from fourth to third or fifth, to fourth. 

Since the accentuation of the melody tone demands various 
degrees of hand-knuckle fixation, spreading of the fingers (abduction) 
should be avoided in the early exercises, and the small hand 
should be kept within the five-finger position. When the fingers 
are abducted the fixation in the hand-knuckles is increased, reducing 
the dffierence between the accented and the unaccented tones. 
In the five-finger position, the physiological subdivision of the hand, 
given on page 314, may determine the order of the exercises. 

The first group might use thumb accentuation, which may be done 
with arm-descent, while the hand-knuckles, which are controlled 
largely by other muscles, may be relaxed. Even full passive 
relaxation may be used at first, in which case only the accented 



Fia. 209. 


key will be depressed. Gradually the finger-fixation should be 
increased until tone is produced. The simplest form of exercise is 
given in Eig. 209a, which exercise eliminates the lift of certain 
fingers while others play. Active finger-lift adds a difficulty. 

The next group, in point of difificifity, uses the fifth finger (the 
second subdivision of the hand, Fig. 166c) as accented finger. It 
should first be combined with the thumb, then with the second finger, 
and later with the others, Fig. 2096. 

The third group uses the index finger (the third subdivision of 
the hand) as the accented finger, which may advantageously be 
combined with 1, then with 5, and later with 4 and 3 (Fig. 209c). 

The same plan should be followed with 3 and 4 as the accented 
fingers, the earliest combinations being with those fingers physio- 
logically more separate from them, namely, thumb and fifth finger 
(Fig. 209 d and e). In the case of the fourth finger, its proximity 
to the fifth adds the difficulty of adjacent fingers already mentioned. 
The 4-1 combination is much easier. 


CHAPTER XXTV 
Style 

In spite of tte imiformity of all piano keyboards and of the 
mechanical principles outlined and analysed in the preceding 
chapters, the playing of any pianist difiers sufficiently from that 
of any other, to permit us properly to speak of individual “ style 
This style adds the so-called personal touch of the player ; it reflects 
the personality, and is generally supposed to be a kind of spiritual 
reflex safely beyond the tentacles of analysis. However that 
may be, the fact remains that the keyboard, tonally speaking, 
is the only medium through which the player can express anything, 
from the most obvious effects of accent and tempo to the most 
subtle variation in emotional colour. Therefore, once again, 
intensity, duration, and the noise elements will give us a cue to 
differences in “ style 

A simple and reasonably satisfactory method of investigating 
some of the rudiments of style is to record the playing by various 
pianists of the same phrase. The spatial and agogic relationships 
are, in that case, constant, and the d;pamic relationship may be 
relatively controlled at some fixed point. Fingering may likewise 
be kept uniform. If the actual duration and intensity were entirely 
uniform, as the notation, strictly speaking, demands, the tonal 
results would have to be the same for all records. As a matter of 
fact, there are always minute differences present, which, on account 
of their minuteness, escape detection under normal conditions. A few 
of the following figures should convince anyone that marked physio- 
logical variations in intensity and duration are always present 
and that these variations parallel the emotional effects secured. 

In investigating style I shall choose, not the elements of move- 
ment which we have thus far considered, but random bits of move- 
ment taken from piano literature. One instance is the octave passage, 
left hand, in the Chopin Polonaise in A-flat where the left hand 
repeats the diatonic figure. E-flat, D, C, B-flat and later E, D-sharp, 
C-sharp, B. The figure is definitely fixed, and, being in octaves, 
does away with variations in fingering, which always affect the 
geometries of a movement. Moreover, as an accompaniment figure, 
and again as a pedal-point figure, variations in its performance 

362 



Plate XLVl 









STYLE 


363 


should be at a minimum. In Fig. 210 are shomi the movements 
of the centre of the hand for the octave passage, left hand : E-flat, 
D, C, B-flat, repeated many times. Three pianists are represented ; 
tempo and intensity were left to the player. Accordingly, the 
differences in the curves can result only from individual differences 
in performance ; or in what, for want of a better word, we call 
style. 

Before pointing out these differences I want to call attention 
to the fact that the motion used in this Chopin passage has long been 
considered and illustrated as a circle or as a broad ellipse both 
for the passage in E-flat major, and the same passage in B major. 
A glance at the curves of Fig. 210 and Fig. 211 shows that, although 
the movements are curvilinear, they are only somewhat circular ; 
it shows, moreover, that the curve for the figure in flats, differs 
materially from that for the same figure in sharps (Fig. 211). This 



difference is a conspicuous example of the effect of the mechanical 
build of the keyboard upon the movement. As the hand moves 
from E-flat to I) it is pulled away from the keyboard striking D 
on its way, but not turning immediately, continuing, instead, in 
the same direction by virtue of the properties of inertia and 
momentum. A short curve is then made between D and C, and 
the direction of hand-movement has been completely changed 
before C is reached. As C is played the hand does not change its 
general direction but continues to B-flat. At B-flat, however, the 
direction changes abruptly. From a mechanical standpoint this 
is opposed to the coordinative principles deduced in earlier chapters. 
According to these, the arm or hand should continue with no abrupt 
change in direction, as between D and 0, and should curve back 
to E-flat. It cannot do so because the fall-board of the piano is 
in the way. If this fall-board were not there, the hand would 
describe a curve about as in Fig. 212. 

The same condition holds for the figure when it occurs in sharps. 
When D-sharp is reached from E there is an abrupt turn, so that the 



364 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

movement from D-sIxarp to C-sLarp is practically a straight line, 
or at any rate, not a convex curve. In fact, in two examples it is 
slightly concave. The movement from B to E, on the contrary, 
is a decided curves allowing for a gradual change of direction, 
and permitting unchanged direction as B and E are played. In 
the chapter on Miscellmeous Movements the effect of the fall- 
board in other figures is shown, hence the flatness of the curves 
just described cannot result from the particular passage but is a 
characteristic of all similar changes from rapid forward to backward 
arm-movements over the black keys. The apparent discrepancy 
between the keys played and the curves shown is explained by the 
fact that the centre of the hand was photographed, consequently 
its projection over the keys would fall approximately midway 
between the keys actually played by the thumb and the fifth 
finger. 

When the photographs are studied for differences in style, we 
find, first, a marked agreement in the fundamental geometrical 
contoTir of the curves. All the figures in Fig. 210 agree in a general 
form, somewhat resembling the case of a grand piano. Those in 
Fig. 211 likewise agree ; here the figure has three straight sides 
and one curved side. 

We find, further, however, minor variations showing individual 
differences. In both Fig. 210 and 211 similar letters refer to the 
same pianist. A person not knowing this, after familiarizing 
himself with the method of recording and interpreting the move- 
ments, could pair them off without great difficulty. There is, for 
example, greater agreement in the superposition of lines between 
Fig. 210a and Fig. 211a, than between Fig. 210a and Fig. 210c, 
or even 6. a and h both Figures show less movement and greater 
accuracy of repetition than c. 

It is, of course, unsafe to generalize from a single example. I feel, 
however, that such difierences as these are a good index to some 
general features of the pianist’s style. Thus figures such as those 
at a are an indication of a high degree of technical accuracy, 
and upon this the dynamic gradations largely depend. Then, too, 
there is noticeable economy of movement in a, which is one of the 
principles of coordination. The curves at c frequently reflect an 
emotional stress, as a result of which technical accuracy is made 
subservient to the emotional content of the passage. In the case 
in question, this emotionalism does not lie in the left hand octaves 
but in the accompanying right hand chords, which were readily 
imaged by the pianists making the records, even though the right 
hand was not actually playing. This image, as a matter of fact, 



STYLE 365 

probably helped to determine certain details in the left-hand 
movement. 

In Pig. 213 the two t 3 ^es of curve, that in E-flat and that in E are 
shown together, illustrating the change from one to the other. This 
record was not made by any of the three pianists represented in 
Figs. 210 and 211, hence differs in detail from them. The funda- 
mental characteristics of the curves are of course readily discernible. 
Beginning at E and passing D-sharp, C-sharp, B, back to E gives 
a curve having the form of those in the similar passage of Fig. 211. 
It was twice played. Then the hand moves in a straight line from 
B to E-flat and the figure takes the form of those in Fig. 210, ending 
finally on E-flat. I have added the letters at the points where the 
fingers strike the keys. Since the curve represents the mid-point of 
the hand, the lines, as already mentioned, naturally cannot coincide 
with the keys struck, but lie approximately midway between these. 

In no one of the photographs is the curve an actual circle. The 
curved parts from a key to the next key played are all deviations 
from true circles. Accordingly, between no strokes of this movement 
is the motion made from a single joint. (See Chapter VI, on the 
Geometries of Movement.) Instead, it involves forward and back- 
ward movement, abduction and adduction of the upper arm, 
flexion and extension of the elbow and flexion and extension of the 
wrist, with, perhaps, some ab- and adduction of the wrist added. 
It forms a pretty example of the curvilinearity of basic movement, 
upon the path of which occur the finer movements of the hand or 
the fingers that actually* produce the tones. The path described 
by the arm is not extremely rapid, even when the passage is played 
at the prescribed tempo. On this relatively slow basic elliptical 
movement the four-times more rapid hand-movement is super- 
imposed. A similar instance is found in the repeated octaves of 
Schubert’s Erl-King, which are frequently played with a relatively 
slow rise and fall of the wrist while the repetition takes place. 

Similar differences are found in passages adding an element of 
change to the one of repetition. la fact, such passages magnify 
the variation we have been considering. Fig. 214 and Fig. 216 
are photographs of the movement of the right hands in two such 
passages. The observer stands behind the player, with the eye on 
an approximate level with the keyboard. In Fig. 214 the octaves 
played were, ascendingly C-G-B-B-G-D-B-F-D-A (ascending fifths 
and descending thirds), in Fig. 216 they were C-E-G-B-G-O-G-C-E. 
The details of the two curves are, therefore, only approximately 
comparable. Yet in spite of this limitation, the great difference in 
style in the performance of the two pianists is clearly marked. 



366 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

Fig. 214: shows an unusually fine coordination, the amplitude and 
the mode of repetition being practically constant. Fig. 215, on the 
contrary, shows marked fluctuations, inhibitions of movement 
before the key was played (as at the point where the hand returned 
from G to E, marked m, which should be as low as E), and irregu- 
larities in the amplitude and in the lateral transfer itself. We may 
conclude that the movement in Fig. 215 is relatively incoordinated, 
since the passage played did not require these variations. The 
conclusion from a single record may seem unwarranted, but receives 
additional verification from Fig. 211a, and c, made respectively 
by the same players. This difference in amplitude and irregularity, 
which I have pointed out as a determinant of style, is present 
in each record made. I add another example : Fig. 216a and 6. 
The movement was that made in playing the interval of a twelfth 
rapidly with many repetitions, m octaves, a type of movement 
described in detail in ^e chapter on Lateral Arm-Movement. It 
is a movement of absolute repetition, and, naturally, one of physio- 
logical repetition. In Fig. 216a we note the expected high degree 
of accuracy, in Fig. 2166, the same movement less accurately 
made. The observer stands behind the player, at the keyboard 
level. In one case the lines show little deviation from the points 
of key-contact ; in the other, there is considerably greater fluctuation, 
both in the path traversed and at the points of key-contact. The 
tempi were the same. The constancy with which Hiis difference is 
met points to a difference of style, reflected in the geometries of 
movement. 

The curves of Figs. 214 and 215, showing the mixed figures, are 
interesting also from the standpoint of lateral arm-movement 
itself. In one case the elongated eight, or bow-tie curve is modified, 
the loop being retained at one end only. This is because the equal 
tonal intensity demands equal amplitude of movement (see Chapter 
Xni), and since the descending third is a shorter interval than the 
ascendiog fifth, this amplitude must be reached in less lateral 
distance. The two lines, therefore, coincide in that part of the 
movement. At the same time, since all abrupt movements add 
a difficulty to physiological coordination, a passage such as the 
one given, is more difficult to play than one permitting a change 
of direction less than direct reversal. The difference need not 
be in the inere sfriking of the correct keys, it may also be in the 
control of intensity. An abrupt change of direction is normally 
associated from a mechamcal and physiological standpoint with 
dynamic accent. Consequently, it is easier to accent the tones 
at the points of the curve than ^ose at the loops. This is further 



Plate XLYII 


Fig. 213. 

Combination of Figs. 210 and 21 1. 




Fig. 214. Superior coordination in the given passage. 


* r 

£ G- 


Fig. 215, Inferior coQrdination in the given passage. 



Fig. 216. h, Inco 5 rdinatcd movement in a rapid lateral arm-transfer. 
Compai'c with Fig. 59, b. 


I / o face 










STYLE 


367 


determined by the factor of speed. If the time interval between 
each two tones is a constant, the hand must travel twice as fast 
between C and G than between 6 and E, for the distance is twice 
as great. And force is the product of velocity and mass. We may 
write as a principle of movement : Lateral movements of equal 
distance, other things equal, are conducive to tones of equal intensity, 
movements of unequal distances, to tones of unequal intensity. 
And, as a corollary : wide skips at moderate or great speed are 
associated with accent. 

This accounts for the extreme diflGlculty of crossing hands for 
single tones in a jyresto or even allegro movement with pianissimo 
tone-production. The logical pedagogic procedure to follow, if 
the problem be the production of equal tonal intensity at moderate 
or great speed, is from small equal lateral displacements to larger 
ones, from scale passages to interval passages, without reversal 
of direction. 

In Pig. 215 some of the tones played permitted a return over 
the same keys, for example E-6-E-G. This should produce the 
typical loop form of lateral transfer. It may be seen between E 
and m, and also, though imequally, between 6-C-C-G and C-E-E-C, 
thus bearing out the conclusions on the curvilinearity of the rapid 
lateral shift. 

In Pig. 217 comparison may be made among the records of a more 
complex technical passage : the first four measures of Chopin’s 
Etude in G-flat, Op. 10, No. 5, more familiar as the Black Key 
Study. The complexity of this passage, compared with the figure 
in the Chopin Polonaise, leaves much more room for individual 
variation. In fact it is at first difficult to recognize the curves as 
records of the same notes. The loops at the left-hand end of the 
figures (the lowest pitch-point of the passage played) are quite 
different, as are also many other points along the curves. The 
fundamental direction relationships, however, at least for a and b 
remain the same. In the descending part of the curve, including 
the l^hand corner there are four forward and backward shifts, 
rather equally distributed ; in the ascending part there are two 
shorter forward shifts followed by a longer one. This agreement 
is to be expected. Individual differences cannot well lie in the gross 
movements, because the same keyboard passage will not permit 
variations in the fundamental directions of movement. The 
differences, as a and b of Pig. 217 show, are found in the smaller 
movements of wrist, hand, and fingers, a, Pig. 217, shows less 
arm-movement and more finger-movement than 6. 6, incidentally, 
was made by a small hand, which avoids excessive stretches of 



368 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

finger abduction hj substituting fore-arm and upper-arm movement 
for it. For tie band making a this was unnecessary, hence, some- 
what less hand-movement (as part of arm-movement) is noticeable. 

Since this figure is played entirely upon black keys, the forward- 
backward arm-shift is interesting evidence of the extent to which 
this arm-movement is used in actual playing. The arm is pushed 
forward to accommodate the thumb. Without this shift the other 
fingers would have to play in an awkward, curved position, or they 
would strike the keys too near the fall-board of the piano. (The 
flattened portions of all the curves on the side nearest the fall-board 
show again the restriction which this places upon technical move- 
ment.) The excessive curve is poor because finger-flexion and abduc- 
tion do not go well together ; the playing too near the fall-board 
makes accurate dynamic control difiEicult by shortening the key- 
lever too much. However, this spatial relationship in no way 
demands the entire forward shift which we find in the photographs. 
This shift is used, as we have seen in other distances, because it is 
conducive to freedom and ease of physiological movement. There 
is no evidence in the records of Fig. 217 of any spatial preparation 
(which would show in greater contrasts of brightness), in spite of 
the fact that the passage can be played in this manner, eliminating 
all forward shift. 

In d. Fig. 217, is seen a defective performance of the same 
passage. In the descent one forward shift is entirely absent, while 
the entire figure is characterized by an excessive forward and 
backward arm-movement, not at all demanded by the keyboard 
relationships. The result of such a performance is d 3 mamic 
irregularity and spatial uncertainty, for it violates the principle 
of coordination that demands a minimum output of muscular 
energy. The projection over the keyboard is not accurate, but 
the movement curve itself is not foreshortened. 

In records of other passages, made by various pianists, differences 
in the lines of movement were clearly discernible in each instance. 
It is my belief that in these differences lie the variations which 
result in individuality or style. The evidence for this belief is at 
hand : in no instance were the movements of two pianists exactly 
aUke, and in every instance the variations were m keeping with the 
generally accepted version of the style of the particular performer. 
Technical perfection is reflected in the exact superposition of a 
repeated movement as at a, Figs. 210, 211 ; and in a minimum of 
movement and angular displacement as in Fig. 216a, both figures 
having been made by the same pianist. Technical inaccuracy, 
whether the result of inefficient technique or emotional abandon, 



Plate XLIX 



Fig. 218 and Fig. 219. Effect of repetition upon movement. 


|3 o 368 




STYLE 


369 


will show itself in deviations from a fixed path in repeated move- 
ments, and in excess movement otherwise, as in c, Figs. 210, 211, 
Fig. 216& and Fig. 217c?. 


In tracing individual differences of style to variations in the 
geometries and dynamics of pianistic movements, the question 
naturally arises : what variations will repetition introduce when 
the records are made by the same player ? To what extent does a 
player actually repeat each movement when playing the same passage 
twice or more in succession ? 

If the human organism were more fixed in its “ modus operandi 
we should expect an absolutely complete repetition. But the study 
of the muscular, circulatory, and neural systems gives a glimpse 
into the field of variable response which characterizes all human 
behaviour. The extent to which variations in the repetition of a 
phrase occur is important in the question we are here considering 
because, if these variations are sufficiently great, they may accoimt 
for the differences which we have just attributed to style. 

Figs. 218 and 219 illustrate the variations of repetition : Fig. 218, 
the curves for measures 27 and 28 of the Chopin Berceuse ; Fig. 
219, the first seven measures of the Chopin E minor Waltz, op. post. 
Although the curves vary in certain details, they show considerably 
less variation than that between records of two pianists. It is 
such differences as these that accoxmt for some of the variations 
in the several performances of any one artist. “ That did not go 
so well ” is an expression frequently heard after a piece is finished. 
The player is well aware of the defects. The curves of Fig. 218 and 
219 ^ow that small variations occur with each repetition, and that 
in addition to the greater differences in the styles of various pianists, 
there are also smaller differences in the style of any one pianist. 

This naay seem somewhat platitudinous. But the illustrations 
have been included to show that accompanying these differences 
in style are differences in the geometries of the movement. For 
each difference the mechanical phase of the movement varies, hence 
also the physiological phase. Each variation in a line, no matter 
how minute, results from a variation in the muscular coordination. 
The variations shown in Fig. 218 and Fig. 219 cannot result from a 
chance shift of the position of the point of light in its attachment 
to the hand, because in that case they would be uniform throughout 
the figures. This uniformity is not present. In the B Minor Waltz, 
for example, only the first two loops show a marked difference, 
in that the lines fail to meet at the outside (lower) points. 



370 TOUCH-FORMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

TEese variations vdthin tEe individual increase with, the technical 
complexity of the passage. Scales and arpeggios, not complicated 
by any special dynamic or spatial demands, stow practically no 
variation, whereas intricate figures, rapid wide leaps, as at the end 
of the first movement of Schumann’s C Major Fantasia, show, at 
times, considerable variation. The extent to which a passage 
has been technically mastered, may be adequately measured by 
the accuracy with which the movement can be repeated. Records 
obtained from kinesthetically untalented pupils show variations 
in movement so wide in extent that they can scarcely be recognized 
as covering the same notation. At the other extreme stand the 
great technicians who repeat movements with extreme accuracy. 

Variations within the individual depend further upon the range 
of movement ; small movements diowing less deviations from any 
norm than wide movements. This is in accordance with the fact, 
that the perception of a deviation depends upon its ratio to the norm, 
a relationship existing not only in the field of kinesthesis, but in 
aU other sense departments as well. 

In the precednig paragraphs the dependence of style upon 
geometric variations in the movements of the player was pointed 
out. The other two factors determining style are : dynamic and 
agogic variations. The method used for recording the geometries 
of movement does not show dynamic or agogic variations. In order 
to record these, some form of dynamograph is needed. The instrument 
described on p. 134 is quite serviceable, although it has the dis- 
advantage of not producing tone. Accordingly, the records here 
shown were checked by the method described on p. 241 in order to 
make sure that chance fluctuations or the abnormality of n<m-tonal 
procedure did not determine the contour of the curves. 

I select for illustration the first phrase of the trio of Chopin’s 
IWeral M^ch, from the B-flat minor Sonata. The notation is 
given in Fig. 220, which shows the dynamograph record of four 
pianists. The conditions restricted the playing to a given tempo, 
each player being otherwise free to play the melody as he felt it. 
Here again we find wide variations in dynamics. In curve A the 
&st tone is quite loud, pressure is maintained ; there is a drop in 
intensity from F to E-flat, a rise from E-flat on, with B-flat as 
climax, then a diminuendo to A-flat. In record B, the first P was 
played softly, a conspicuous crescendo made up to C as a climax, 
with the following B-flat and A-flat somewhat softer. In C, the 
crescendo is much less marked and in D it is entirely absent, the 
entire phrase having been played at a uniformly moderately soft 
intensity. The lettering given is only approximate, since, on a 



STYI^E 


371 


dynamograpL. of this type the actual moment of tone-production 
is not indicated by the curves. Inferences as to tempo rubato 'within 
the phrase are, therefore, subject to error. 

The variations in the degree of wei^t-transfer are equally well 
marked. In record D, the first E was played staccato (with the 
pedal sustaining tone) because the line irops back to the original 
level. In C and A the pressure immediately after percussion was 
noticeably retained ; somewhat less so in B. The latter part of 
D, however, shows a marked degree of weight-transfer, eliminating 
all sudden fluctuations. This leads to the assumption of a non-per- 
cussive touch, which, as a matter of fact, was used in the playing 
of this record. The degree of weight transferred is particularly 



noticeable by comparing the troughs in A and B for the tones 
B-flat and A-flat with the noticeable plateau of D, for the same 
tones. 

The instrument used was, of comrse, qiute sensitive, and many of 
the dynamic fluctuations recorded would not affect tone since the 
key may have been fully depressed when they occurred. None 
the less, they are of sufiS-cient naagnitude to show that they are 
indi'vidual variations, hence operative as well before and during 
tone-production as after. Only dynamic variations have been 
analysed, but the agogic equivalents, typified by the tempo rubato, 
are no less marked, and between the two, can explain many 
differences in style. 



372 TOUCH-FOEMS OF PIANO TECHNIQUE 

I could pursue this investigation mucli fuxtlier to advantage, 
but it is leading away from tbe purely physiological field into the 
psychological. The d;^ainic and agogic variations, however, 
responsible for the stylistic variations, are, after all, a resrft of 
differences in muscular coordination, and, as such, fall within the 
scope of the present investigation. When a technically mtalented 
pupil plays the passage in question, we get, as a typical curve, 
that shown in Fig. 221. When this is compared with Fig. 220 we 
note a marked lack of control in dynamic values. Tones are accented 
that should receive no accent, others that are prominent, are touched 
but lightly. Accordingly, the artistic rendition of a passage on the 
piano demands a high degree of dynamic control. We must be 
able to increase or decrease muscular action by very small 
amounts. The spread of tension must be finely controlled. Nor 
should the practice of such control be unduly postponed. The 
question of balance, that is to say, of bringing out a melody and 
subduing the background, can be taught quite early without any 



Fro. 221. 


noticeable difficulty. The reason for this is the fact that the organism 
has already used force variations : in grasping and lifting objects 
of various weights, in walking or running at various speeds, in 
striking, pulling, or pushing against various resistances. True, 
ten years later, the pupil will probably use a different coordination 
to secure similar effects, because the weight of the anatomical 
parts, and the strength of the muscles will have changed, but the 
ability to secure some difference in dynamic value is present at the 
beginning of instruction, and is a far more fundamental coordination 
than dexterity. 

The word style, however, is used not only to distinguish the 
playing of one pianist from that of another, but also to differentiate 
the works of one composer from those of another. We speak of a 
Mozart Style, a Chopin Style, a Bach Style, meaning thereby 
characteristics in the manner of performance as well as in the 
manner of composition. Here, too, an interesting field lies open 
for the patient investigator, for such differences of style have just as 
clear a physical basis as those we have been considering. A 
detailed treatment of this phase is not a part of the present inquiry. 



STYLE 373 

Nor tave I pursued the investigation far enough to warrant broad 
conclusions. I shall select a few records merely to serve as illustra- 
tions of such differences in style. Take, for example, the manner 
in which an allegro scale is played in a Mozart Sonata and in a 
Chopin work — such as the F-sharp Impromptu. Fig. 222 illustrates 




the difference. The Mozart scale, 6 in the figure, is decidedly non- 
legato, the needle of the dynamograph showing no legato between 
any two tones, since the fluctuating line drops to its original zero- 
level each time. The Chopin scale, on the contrary, a in the figure, 
is very legato, the dynamograph tracing being practically horizontal, 

a 




Fig. 223. 

with the one exception of a drop as the thumb was played. The 
fact that several pianists produced similar records, with a difference 
in the degree of legato as the chief characteristic, points to this 
physical quality as one of the determinants of style. A scale in the 
Mozart style — I am well aware of the many exceptions — is, other 
things equal, less legato than a scale in the Chopin style. Or, take 
again a very light legato, such as that used in the softer parts of 



374 TOTJCH-FOEMS 01’ PIANO TECHNIQUE 

the melody in a Chopin Noctnme, and compare it Tvith the touch 
used in the figuration work of Debussy’s L’Isle Joyeuse. The 
difiereuce, Eig. 223a andh, is one of intensity, duration, and legato. 
The Chopin melody a is very soft, slow, and played with sustained 
pressure ; the Debussy passage is louder (shown by the height of 
the liue), faster (shown by the horizontal extent of each loop), 
and non-legato. That is to say, such differences in style are differ- 
euces in the inteisity, duration, and conuection of the tones. lu 
both figures the sensitivity of the recording iostrument makes them 
very obvious ; in the actaal performance, the intoisiiy and legato 
differences are often very minute, and in that form readily escape 
detection by the average observer. Therein lies the value of the 
graphic method of analysis : it records differences too minute for 
the eye or the ear to detect clearly. The reproduction of particular 
effects is a relatively easy matter for an accomplished pianist 
once he knows the exact nature of the effect. And in many cases 
his esperienced observation enables him to imitate directly. But 
the matter changes where inexperienced pupils are concerned. 
The method of imitation is here pedagogicaUy often inadequate 
and an exact knowledge of Ihe nature of an effect is frequently 
the only means of making the solution clear to the pupil. A pupil 
may not understand what a “ pearly ” touch is, but he can readily 
be made to understand what its mechanical equivalent, a non- 
legato touch is. 

The Pedal. 

The physiological mechanics of piano techique should include, 
as an interesting and certainly an important part, an analysis of 
pedaling ; for, whatever tone-colors the pianist draws from the 
instrument, these are largely modified and controlled by a judicious 
use of the piano pedal. The technique of pedaling is as much 
a physiological thing as are the movements of hand and fingers, 
^d involves coordinations no less fine than many of those analysed 
in preceding chapters. In studying such phases as tone-qualities 
md touch-forms, one must bear in mind the possibility of mis- 
mterpretation through omission of pedal effects, which play over 
into key-board technique in so many ways that the relationship 
of the pedal to the hand- or arm-technique really demands 
simultaneous study and recording. This soon results in a maag 
of data, and the eaqierimentcr finds it difficult to draw a line 
be^een inclusion and exclusion. The pedal records already secured 
point out numerous subordinate problems, and the ramifications 



STYLE 


375 


lead in so many directions that, rather than attempt a partial 
presentation of the results which the graphic recordmg of pedal 
movements has produced, I shall leave the present volume 
incomplete in the pedal phases, in the belief that, once the data are 
complete, a separate detailed presentation of the use and function 
of the piano pedals will better serve the educative purpose. 



EESTJME 


The preceding study clearly sKows the need of a revision in some 
of our pet pedagogic concepts. When Hofmann plays the March 
from the Enins of Athens, he does not do so with relaxed arms ; 
when Hutcheson plays the Gr-sharp minor Etude of Chopin he does 
not transfer weight from key to key. Eelaxation and weight-transfer 
are the result of an attempt to get away from the fixed hand- 
position technique of the older Eeinecke school. As is so often 
the case, the pioneers in the movement, in applying a helpful 
means, went to the other extreme, which their less capable disciples 
have slavishly followed. 

In the foregoing pages is suflScient evidence to show the need 
for a partial return to the older school : the need for practising 
finger drill with the arm poised above the keys, that is, without 
arm-weight. Fortunately, pianists have always, to some extent, 
played this way, since it is quite impossible mechanically and 
physiologically to play certain passages otherwise. But I feel 
quite sure that in the last decade, finger-stroke has not received 
adequate consideration in piano pedagogy, and that undue stress 
of relaxation has seriously restricted velocity and technical brilliance. 

No less important is the conclusion that the acquisition of pianistic 
movements is primarily a psychological process. The records have 
shown, beyond any doubt, that a muscular coordination changes 
with each change of tempo, intensity, or pitch of the tones. In 
order, therefore, to exercise the muscles used in the actual move- 
ment, we should, from the beginning, have to practise each passage 
at the tempo, intensity, and pitch at which it is finally to be played. 
The practical impossibility of doing this does not invalidate the 
statement ; the fact remains that, as soon as we change any of the 
three factors, the muscular reaction changes. The records given in 
the preceding chapters, furnish for the first time, so far as I know, 
actual proof of this variation, and thus demonstrate the uselessn^ 
of so-called mechanical practice. Included here are all the various 
mechanical or silent keyboards. If the nature of the muscular 
movement is determined by the tonal effect desired — and of this 
there can no longer be any doubt — the absence of this tonal effect, 
or its inadequate image, deprives the organism of the chief deter- 
minant of the muscular coordination. We do not move our muscles 

376 



EESUME 


377 


because we know whicb muscle contracts, but because we give 
tbe muscles an aim : tbe moving of tbe band to a specific point, 
or tbe production of a specific tone. Consequently, tbe value 
of slow practice, of pbrase practice, practising of each band 
separately, later addition of pedal, in fact all tbe forms differing 
from tbe form in whicb tbe piece is finally to be played, must be 
sought in tbe psychological field. Electrical stimulation has shown 
that, muscularly and mechanically, tbe normal infant is as ready 
to play a rapid five finger sequence as is tbe trained adult ; the 
difference is in tbe ability to tell tbe fingers in advance what to 
do ; that is to say tbe difference is one of experience, of learning. 
This must not be understood as eliminating tbe important individual 
differences, for these exist in tbe learning process as well as in tbe 
retentiveness of the neuro-muscular system. 

Tbe study shows, further, bow a knowledge of tbe fundamental 
principles of mechanics and of muscular action can be of value to tbe 
piano teacher. Knowing tbe location of a muscle and its various 
angles of pull will readily prevent tbe assignment of impossible 
mechanical conditions ; it wiU make possible correct muscular drill ; 
it will aid in distinguishing normal muscular fatigue from tbe fatigue 
of incoordination; and it will economize in practice time and 
method. In short, it substitutes cause for effect and has a value 
for tbe piano teacher much tbe same as that of knowing tbe cause 
of a pathological condition has for tbe doctor. 

I recall, particularly, two instances where pupils bad worked for 
several months trying to get “tonal strength with a perfectly 
relaxed arm ”, Naturally, they could not succeed. Tbe need for 
fixation during tone-production was pointed out to them and within 
a single lesson period tbe teacher was satisfied. Such cases, 
unfortunately, are of daily occurrence. Very often tbe necessary 
mechanical analysis is never made and tbe pupils continue day 
after day in their attempts to do tbe mechanically impossible, 
until tbe hopelessness of ^e task and tbe ensuing loss of interest 
turn them from their task into non-musical activities. Whereupon 
tbe teacher (?) attributes it to a lack of talent, or poor studentship. 

The experimental procedure adopted in the present study shows, 
too, tbe need for getting away from tbe mere subjective reaction of 
tbe teacher or pupil by using tbe graphic recording method. In a 
field where emotional colouring and imagination play legitimate 
and important roles, tbe physical and physiological bases can be 
separated only by eliminating tbe psychological factors. This 
discrimination explains tbe differences between tbe conclusions 
reached in tbe preceding chapters and tbe generally accepted 



378 tOUCH-FOEMS of PIANO TECHNIQUE 

statemeatB of the musician. How the foraxer lead into- the latter, 
why the |Jiysiological facts are transformed into the coloutfol 
psycholo^cal efiects is the next step in the investigation. 

Here we reach an interesting and formidable array of new 
problemg. How does the imagination turn the mechanics of the 
piano into variegated pictures ? How does the direction of the atten- 
tion indumce the peri ormance of a passage ? Is the whole or part 
method of practice better? Sho^d both hands be practised 
from the beginning ? "When should pedal be added ? Should the 
ear or the eye or neither come first ? How can memory be improved ? 
"What will give the public performer more assurance ? "What is the 
best ler^h of practice period ? How far apart should practice 
periods be ? Is supervised practice always desirable ? 

The list could readily be extended. And these are questions 
which, I dare say, evmi the teacher to whom “ all theory is grey ” 
would like to have answered. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

T he selection of a representative bibliography from the hundreds 
of books, monographs and articles which one must wade 
through in a study of this kind, before the essentials can be separated 
from the non-essentials, is not an ea^ task, nor one that can be 
kept entirely free of significant omissions. The following list is 
restricted, so far as possible, to the physiological mechanics of 
the problem. It either omits entirely, or touches but superficially, 
such associated fields as physiological chemistry, physics, acoustics, 
construction of the pianoforte, historical analjrses, practical schools 
of technique in the forms of exercises and etudes, pedagogy, the 
countless articles in the music periodicals, psychological and 
aesthetic aspects of the problem, and duplications of principles 
either by the same authors or by their immediate followers. 

General Anatomy and Physiology 

Bayuss, William M. FmuAphs of General Physiology. Pp. 882 . 

London: Longmans, Green and Company, 1924. 

Bowen, Wilbur P. Applied AruOomy atd Kinesiology. Pp. 348. 

Philaddphia : Lea and Febiger, 1923. 

Evans, C. Lovatt. iJeceni Advances in Physiology. Pp. 366. 

PMadelpMa : P. BlaJdston’s Son and Company, 1926. 

Pick, Eudolph. Handbwdi der Anatorm urd Meohcenik der Gdenke. 
Jena : Gustav Fischer, 1904. 

Funke, Otto. Ldirbwh der Physiologie. 2 vol. Leipzig : Leopold 
Voss, 1863. 

Gerrish, F. H. a Tex&mh of Anahmy by American Authors. Pp. 943. 

Philadelphia : Lea Brothers and Company, 1902. 

Gray, Henry. Anatomy. Pp. 1614. Philadelpltia : Lea and Febiger, 
1908. (Eevised 1924.) 

Howell, William H. The Humm Machine. Pp. 75. New York: 

Funk and Wagnalls Company, 1924. 

Howell, William H. Text-Book of Physiology. Pp. 1047. Philadelphia : 
W. B. Saunders Company, 1926. 

Jones, Frederic W. The Principles of Anatomy as seen in the Hand. 

Pp. 319. London : J. and A. Churchill, 1920. 

Ladd and Woodworth. Elements of Physiological Psychology. Pp. 687. 

New York : Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1915. 

Martin, H. N. The Human Body. Pp. 629, New York : Henry Holt 
and Company, 1917. 


379 



380 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Mitchell, Philip H. A Textbook of General Physiology, Pp. 748. 
New York : McGraw Hill Book Company, Inc., 1923. 

Mollier. fiber Statik der menschlichen Schuller, J ena : Gustav 

Pisciier, 1899. 

Richet. Dictionnaire de Physiologie, 

Schafer. Textbook of Physiology, Pp. 1002. 1900. 

Steinhausen, P. A. “ Ziir Mechanik der Sclmlter.” Arch, f. Anatomie 
u. Physiologie, 1899. Snpp. Bd. 

Muscles : Structure, Function, and Action 

Abrahamson, I. “ Some Reflections on Muscle Tonus.” Journ, Nerv, 
and Ment, Bis,, 1925, 61, 337-^43. 

Barnes, J. C. “ Voluntary Isolation of Control in a Natural Muscle 
Group.” Psychol, Monog,, 93, 1916. 

Beevob, Charles E. “ On Some Points in the Action of Muscles.” 
Brain, vol. xiv, p. 53. 

Benedict and Cathcart. Muscular Work, Washington : Carnegie 
Institute, Publication No. 187. 

Cobb, S. “ Review on the Tonus of Skeletal Muscle.” Physiol, Reo,, 
1925, 5, 518-550. 

Dart, R. A. “ Double Innervation of Striped Muscles.” Journ, Nero, 
and Merd, Bis,, 1924, 60, 553-567. 

Dodge, R., and Bott, B. A. ‘‘ Antagonistic Muscle Action in Voluntary 
Flexion and Extension.” Psych, Rev,, 1927, 34, 499-530. 

Emery, F. E. “ The Effect of Temperature upon the Tonus of Skeletal 
Muscle.” Amer, Journ, Physiol,, 1925, 73, 296-303. 

Engelmann. Vher den Ursprung der Muskelkraft, Leipzig, 1893. 

Fenn, W. D, “ The Relation between the Work Performed and the 
Energy Liberated in Muscular Contraction.” Journ, Physiol,, 
1924, 58, 373-395. 

Frank, G. “ Das histologische Bild der Muskelkontraktion.” Pflug, 
Arch, f d, ges. Physiol,, 1927, 218, 37-53. 

Fulton, J. F. '‘The Inseparability of Mechanical and Electrical 
Responses in Skeletal Muscle.” Amer, Journ, Physiol,, 1925, 75, 
261-266. 

Gault, R. H. “ On Conditions affecting the Maximal Rate of Voluntary 
Flexor and Extensor Movements of the Right Arm.” Am&r, Journ, 
Psych,, xvi, p. 357, July, 1905. 

Goldscheider, a. Physiologie des Muskelsinnes, Leipzig: J. A. 
Barth, 1898. 

Goldscheider, A. GesammeUe Abhandlungen, Physiologie des 
Muskelsinnes, Leipzig, 1909. 

Hartmann, Johan J. Beitrdge zur Mechanik des quergeatreiftm Mvskds, 
Tubingen: F. Pietzcker, 1903. 

Hill, Archibald V. Muscular Activity, Pp. 111. Baltimore : Williams 
and Wilkens Company, 1926. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 381 

Hueck, "W. Muskelharte und Muskelspanmingsgefulil.” Arch, /. d, 
ges. Physiol,, 1924, 206, 101-106. 

Kahn, E. H. ‘‘ Beitrage zur Lelire vom Muskeltonus.’’ Arch, f, d, ges. 
Physiol,, 1924, 205, 381-404. 

Leibowitz, 0. “ Zur Frage des Tonus bei gefiihrten Bewegungen.” 
Btsch, Zsch,f, Nervenhk,, 1924, 83, 314-338. 

Lombard, W. P. “ The Action of Two-joint Muscles.” Am, Phys, 
Educ, Rev., viii, 141. Amer. Journ, Physiol., xx, 1. 

Mallock, a. “ Muscular Action.” Nature, 1925, 115, 154-156. 

Masazza, a. 11 tono della musculatura striata. Oervello, 1924, 3, 91-128. 

McKjENZiE, R. T. “ The Isolation of Muscular Action.” Am. Phys. 
Educ. Rev., Nov., 1908. 

Mosso, A. Die Ermudung. 

Nakamura, T. ‘‘ Untersuchungen iiber die elastichen Eigenschaften 
der Muskeln.” Arch.f. d, g^. Physiol., 1924, 205, 92-107. 

Noica. “ Sur le role passif et actif des antagonistes dans les mouvements 
volontaires.” G. r. Soc. biol., 1925, 92, 1128-1131. 

Pereira, J. R. “ Sur la dualite fonctionnelle de la fibre musculaire.” 
C. r. Soc. biol., 1925, 93, 154-156. 

Peahl, J. ‘‘ Elastizitatswirkungen unserer Muskeln.” Zsch. f. Biol., 
1924, 81, 211-216. 

Richer, M. Paul. Contraction musculaire physiologique. St. Germain : 
Masson et Cie. 

Richter, F. “ Beitrage zur Frage nach den Physikalischen Grundlagen 
der Muskelfunktion.” Pflug. Arch, f. d. ges. Physiol., 1927, 218, 
1-36. 

Rosenthal, Isidor. General Physiology of Muscles and Nerves. 
London : KeganPaul, Trench, Trubner, and Company, Ltd., 1895. 

Schwartz and Osohmann. “ Contribution au problems du 
mecanisme des contractures musculaires.” G. r. Soc. biol., 1924, 
91, 275. 

Smith, G. “Lectures on the Sympathetic Innervation of Striated 
Muscle.” Brit. Med. Journ., 1925, 1, 197-201 ; 251-256 ; 298- 
301; 359-363; 398-403. 

Steinhausen, W. “ Untersuchungen fiber die elastichen Eigenschaften 
der Muskeln.”, Arch.f. d. ges. Physiol., 1924, 206, 76-91. 

Wagner, E. “ IJber die Zusammenarbeit der Antagonisten bei der 
Willktirbewegung.” Zsch.f. Biol., 1925, 83, 59-93 ; 120-144. 

Wbdenski, — . “Du Rhythme musculaire dans la contraction 
normals.” Archives de fhysiologie, 1891, p. 58. 

Witschl, F. “ Fortgesetzte Untersuchungen fiber Muskelermfidung.” 
Zsch.f Biol., 1927, 86, 1-26. 


General Principles of Physiological Movement 

Beevor, Charles E. Muscular Movements and their Representation in 
the Nervous System. Pp. 100. London : Adlard and Son, 1904. 



382 BIBLIOGEAPHY 

Boit, E. a. “ Coordinate Volitional Action of Antagonistic Mnscnlar 
Groups.” Befp, Brit. Ass. A&o. Sd., 1924, 436-438. 

CiossON, Ebnest. “Les Bases physiologiques de la technique du 
piano.” Le Qmde Musicals, xzxvi, 47. Brussels, 1909. 
Dalla-Eosa. PhysioJfOgische Anatomic des Bewegungsappcurates, 
Vienna : E. Denticke. 

Dembnv, Geobges. “Du Eole des muscles antagonistes dans les 
actes de la locomotion.” Arch, de physiol., 1890-91. 

Dement, Geobses. Les Bases sdentifigues de VSducation fhysiyue. 
2nd ed. Paris : F. Alcan, 1903. 

Dement, Geobges. Mecanisme et Education des mouvements. Pp. 536. 
Paris : F. Alcan, 1924. 

Du Bois-Ebtmond. SpezieUe Mushelphysiologie oder Bew^ungslshre. 

Berlin : A. Hirschwald, 1903. 

Du Bois-Eetmond. ther die tJbung. Berlin, 1881. 

Duchenne, G. B. Physiologie des mouvements. Pp. 172. Paris, 1867. 
Fischeb, 0. “ Phyaiologische Mechanik.” Enzyh. d. math. Wissenseh., 
iv, 8. Leipzig : B. G. Teubner, 1905. 

Foebsiee, OrmuBD. Physiologie und PaLhologie der Koordination. 
Jena : G. Fischer, 1902. 

Gessleb, H., and Mabkbbt, E. “ Die Okonomie der menschlichen 
Muskelarbeit.” Zsoh.f. Biol., 1927, 86, 173-180. 

HttXj a. V. lAvvng Machin&ry. Pp. 327. New York: Harcourt, 
Brace, 1927. 

TTn.T. j A. V. Musmdar Movement in Man. Pp. 104. New York : 
McGraw-Hill Book Co. Inc. 

Jackson. ZWe finger- und HandgymnasUk. Leipzig, 1866. 

Lagbange, Fbbnand. ■ Physiology of Bodily Exercise. Pp. 395. New 
York : D. Appleton and Company, 1915. 

Mabet, Etienne J. Movement. (Translated by E. Pritchard.) Pp. 323. 
New York : D. Appleton and Company, 1895. Le Mouvemeni. 
Paris : Masson, 1894. 

Mabet, Etienne J. La Machine Anitnale. Paris : F. Alcan. 

Eeus, j. H. 0. “ The Maximum Work of the Several Muscles of the 
Forearm.” Joum. Physiol., 1925, 60, 95-99. 

WooDWOBTH, E. S. Le Mouvment. Pp. 400. Paris : Biblioth^ue 
Internationale de Psyohologie Espdrimentale, 1903. 

Wundt, W. M. Die Lehre von der Muskdbemgung. Braunschweig : 
F. Vieweg und__Sohn, 1858. 

Zabludowski. “ tJber Schreiber und Pianistenkrampf.” AUgemeim 
Musikze^ung,!^. 

Zabludowski. “ Uberanstcengung beim Schreiben und Musizieren.” 
Zeitsehrift fur diatetische physikdische Therapie, 1904, vol. vii. 
Heft 11 and 12. 



BIBLIOGEIPHY 383 

Physiology op Piano Technique 

Bandmann, Tony. Die Gewichtsteclmik des Klavier spiels. Pp. 112, 
Leipzig : Breitkopf iind Hartel, 1907. 

Bernajrd, Edouard. Essai pour la methods rationnelle dujeu du piano. 
Pp. 56. Paris : E. Diirdilly, 1916. 

Bilstin, Youby. Methode psycho-physiologique d^enseignement musical. 
Paris : M. Eschig et CSe., 1927. 

Bosquet, Emile. Technique moderns du pianists virtuose. Bruxelles : 
Sckott-fr feres. 

Bbee, Malwine. The Groundwork of the Leschetizky Method. Pp. 80. 
Breithaupt, Eudolp M. Die Grundhgen des Geioichtspiels. Pp. 105. 

VoL iii. Leipzig : C. E. Kalint NacMolger, 1913. 

Breithaupt, Eudolp M. Die NatHrliche Klaviertechnik. Pp, 659. 
Leipzig : 0. E. Kalint, 1921. 

Breslaur, Emil. Methodik des Klavier-^nterrichts. Pp. 496. Berlin : 
N. Simrock, 1886. 

Breslaur, Emil. Technische Grundlage des Klavier spiels. Leipzig : 
Breitkopf und Hartel, 1896. 

Brotherhood, James. A Knowledge of the Relation of Physiology and 
Anatomy to Pianoforte Playing. Pp. 16. New York and Chicago : 
J. H. Eoote, 1888. 

Brotherhood, James. Muscles used in Pianoforte Playing. Pp. 15. 
New York : G. jSchirmer, 1887. 

Brugnoli, Athelio. Dinamica Pianistica. Pp. 326. Milano : 
G. Eicordi e Co., 1926. 

Caland, Elisabeth. Arwbewegungen heim kunsUerischen Klamerspiel, 
Pp. 99. Magdeburg ; Heinrichshofen’’s Verlag, 1919. 

Caland, Elisabeth. Ausnutzung der Kraftquellen heim Klavierspiel. 

Stuttgart : Ebnersche Musikalienhandlung, 1905. 

Caland, Elisabeth. Das Kunstlerische PSavierspiel. Stuttgart: 

Ebnersche Musikalienhandlung, 1910. 

Campbell, Le Eoy B. The True Function of Relaxation in Piano 
Playing. Pp. 95. St. Louis : Art Publication Society, 1922. 
Carmienoke, Albert. The Mechanics of Piano-Playing. Pp. 39, 
Chicago : C. E. Summy Company, 1905. 

Caspar, Helene. Die Moderns Bewegimgs- und Anschlags-lekre. 
Leipzig : P, Pabst, 1910. 

Chase, Mary Wood. Natural Laws in Piano Technique. Pp. 128. 
Boston : Oliver Ditson Co, 1910. 

Christiani, a. E. The Principles of .Expression in Piano Playing. 

Pp. 303. New York : Harper and Brothers, 1885. 
Clark-Steiniger, F. H. Die Lehre des emheUUchen Kunsimittels heim 
Klavierspiel. Berlin : Eaabe und Plothow, 1885. 

CzERNKAS, N. “ liber die Bedeutung der Arbeit der fingerbeugenden 
Muskeln beim Klavierspiel.” MusikpMagogische Blatter^ 33, 19, 
De BEart, W. P. E. ** liber die Bestimmung der Spielbelastung mittels 
einer Wage.” Mimkpddagogische 1910. 



384 BIBLIOGEAPHY 

Deppe, Ludwig. ‘‘ Armleiden des Klavierspielers.’^ Deutsche Musiker 
Zeituncf, 1885. 

Du Bois-Eeymond. Die Ausnutzung der Kraftquellen beim Elamersfieh 
Stuttgart : Ebnersche Musikalienhandlimg, 1905. 

Dunn, John P. Das Geheinmis der SandfuhruTig beim Elamerspid. 

Pp. 99. Leipzig : C. P. Kahnt Nachfolger, 1914. 

Ehrenpechteb, C. Technical Study in the Art of Pianoforte Playing 
{Deppe" s Principles). London: William Eeeves, 1892. 

Ehklich, Heinrich. How to Practice on the Piano. (Translated by 
T. Baker.) Pp. 60. Hew York : 6. ScHrmer, 1905. 

Eielden, Thomas. The Science of Pianoforte Technigue. Pp. 177. 

London : MacMillan and Company, Ltd., 1927. 

Eoote, Arthur. Some Practical Things in Piano Playing. Pp. 34. 
Boston : Artbur P. Schmidt, 1909. 

Germer, Heinrich. Lehrbuch der TonMldung beim Elavierspiel. 

Leipzig : Hug and Company, 1896. 

Germer, Heinrich. Wie studiert man Elavier-Technik ? Pp. 72. 

Leipzig : Gebruder Hug und Company, 1902. 

Grabill, E. W. The Mechanics of Piano Technique. Chicago, 
1909. 

Hasenmaybr, a. Die Harmonie der Spannung und Bewegung in der 
Elamertechnik. Pp, 62. Leipzig : Breitkopf und Hartel, 1917. 
JaelIi, Marie. La Musigue et la psychophysiologie. Pp. 171. Paris : 
F. Alcan, 1896. 

Jaell, Marie. Le Micanisme du toucher. Pp. 146. Paris : A. Colin 
et Cie., 1897. 

Jaell, Marie. La Resonance du toucher et la topographic des pulpes. 
Pp. 161. Paris : F. Alcan, 1912. 

Johns, Clayton. The Essentials of Pianoforte Playing. Boston: 
0. Ditson and Company, 1909. 

Johnstone, J. Alered. Touch, Phrasing, and Interpretation. Pp. 147. 
London : W. Eeeves, 1904. 

Krizek, a. Piano Athletics. Leipzig : F. Hofmeister, 1906. 

KOhn, E. Breithaupt-Technik und Anfdnger-unterricht. Pp. 60. Leipzig : 
C. F. Kahnt. 

Mason, Daniel 6. A Neglected Sense in Piano Playing. Pp. 50. New 
York : G. Schirmer, 1912, 

Mason, William. Touch as Applied to Pianoforte Practice. Pp. 18. 

Orange, N. J. : Press, 1886. 

Mason, William. Touch and Technigue. Philadelphia. 

Matthay, Tobias. The Act of Touch. Pp. 327. London : Longmans, 
Green and Company, 1916, 

Matthay, Tobias. Some Commentaries on the Teaching of Pianoforte 
Technigue. Pp. 55. London: Longmans, Green and Company, 
1923. 

Nazaroef, — . P^chophysiologische Methods des musikalischen 

Studiums. (Eussian.) St. Petersburg ; Johansen. 



BIBLIOGEAPHY 385 

Ortmann, Otto. The Physical Basis of Piano Touch and Tone, Pp. 180. 
London and New York : Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. and 
Company, Ltd., 1925. 

Ortmann, Otto. “ Weight Discrimination as a Measure of Technical 
Skill in Piano Playing,” Joum, Comp, Psych,, vol. iii. No. 1, 
1923. 

Parsons, Albert R. The Synthetic Method for the Pianoforte, Boston, 
1892. 

Pearce, Charles W. The Art of the Piano Teacher, Pp. 352. New York, 
6. Schirmer, 1916. 

Pbstalozzi, August. Bewegungsphysiohgische Voraussetzungen zur 
technischen Beherrschung der Musihinstrumente. Berlin : Trowitsch 
und Sohn, 1927. 

Prentice, Thomas R. Hand Gymnastics for the Scientific Development 
of the Muscles used in Playing the Pianoforte, Pp. 40. London 
and New York : Novello, Ewer and Company, 1893. 

Raie, Oscar. “ Uber Fingerfertigkeit beim Havierspiel ” (Stumpf, C. : 
Bei, zur Ahust, u, Musikwissemch,, vol. iii, p. 65). 

Ramul, Peter. Die Psychophysischen Grundlagen der modernen 
Klaviertechnik. Pp. 121. Leipzig : C. F. Kahnt, 1923. 

Reudie, Charles F. Pianoforte Playing, Pp. 116. London : Joseph 
Williams, Ltd., 1912. 

Riemann, Hugo. Catechism of Pianoforte Playing, Pp. 92. London : 
Augener and Company. 

Riemann, Hugo. Handbuch des Klamerspiels, Leipzig: Max 
Hesse, 1888. 

Ritschl, Alexander. Die Anschlagsbewegungen beim Klavierspiel. 
Pp. 131. Berlin : C. F. Vieweg, 1911. 

Rose, Alfred. Wie ubt man Klavier, Miinster : Ernst Bisping, 1912. 

Schaefer, Karl L. Einfuhrung in die Musihmsserischcft, Pp. 165. 
Leipzig : Breitkopf und Hartel, 1916. 

ScHARWBNKA, Xaver. Bdtroge zur FingerbUdung, Leipzig : Breitkopf 
und Hartel. 

ScHARWENKA, Xaver. Methodik des Klavierspiels. Pp, 149. Leipzig : 
Breitkopf und Hartel, 1907. 

SocHTiNG, E, Die Lehre des freien Falles, Berlin: Otto Wernthal. 

Steinhausbn, F. a. “ tJber Zitterbewegxmgen in der instrumentalen 
Technik.” Der Klavierlehrer, 1905, vol. ii. 

Stoewe, Gustav. Die Klaviertechnik dargestellt als musikalisch- 
physiologische Bewegungslehre, Pp. 151. Berlin : R. Oppenheim, 
1886. 

TESSiiNYE, M. G. Die NatUrliche Klavierhand, Budapest : Rozsnyai, 
1914. 

Tetzel, Eugene. ‘‘Aufruf an die Klavierpedagogen.” Zeitschrift 
Musikpedagogische Blotter, xxxv, 23. 

Tetzel, Eugene. Das Problem der modernen Klaviertechnik, Pp. 99. 
Leipzig : Breitkopf und Hartel, 1909. 


00 



386 BIBLIOGEAPHY 

Thiberge, Eaymone. UEnseignernent j^hysiologique de la technique 
fianistique. Pp. 60. The Author ; 14 Avenue du Maine, XVe, 
Paris. 

Townsend, Will. Balance of a/rm in Piano Technique, London and 
Leip 2 dg : Bosworth and Company, Ltd., 1903. 

Unschuld, Marie von M. Die Hand des Pianisten, Pp. 86. Leipzig : 
Breitkopf und Hartel, 1903. (Bnghsh translation by H. M. Dare, 
1903.) 

Wells, H. The Pianist’s Thumb, Pp. 73. Boston : Oliver Ditson 
Company, 1926, 



INDEX 


Abduction, arm, 20, 35 ; finger, 311 f ; 

wrist, 28 
Ahstoss, 173 

Accelerando, in lateral arm-movement, 
169 ; see also Agogic effects. Tempo, 
Speed 

Accuracy, affected by intensity, 112, 
172, 286; affected by speed, 102, 
284, 288 ; see also Incoordination 
Action and reaction, 82-9 ; in finger- 
key percussion, 82, 229 ; in sostenuto, 
200; in staccato, 199 
Active movement, 90 ; see also Activity 
and passivity 

Activity and passivity, 90-8 ; degrees 
of, 95 ; how controlled, 96 
Adduction, arm, 20, 35; wrist, 28; 
see also Abduction 

Agogic effects, in lateral arm-transfer, 
168 f ; in scales, 256, 261 ; in 
staccato, 207 f; of muscular con- 
traction, 349 ; on style, 370 ff ; see 
also Speed, Tempo 

Amplitude, affected by intensity, 167 ; 
affected by range, 170 ; inco- 
ordinated in slow movement, 169 ; 
in fast movement, 206 
Angles of muscular action, 217 
Angular movement, 78 ; in lateral 
arm-shift, 162, 166, 167 ; in miscel- 
laneous movements, 283 ; opposed 
to smoothness, 105, 161; see also 
Curved movement. 

AnhvJb, 168 

Antagonistic muscles, 58, 61, 94, 101, 
116, 122, 305 ; in staccato, 209 ; in 
vibrato, 209, 213 

Application of force, point of, 8 f ; 

see also Tonus 
Arched hand, 249 f, 331 
Arm-ascent, 181 ; see also Key- 
release, Weight-release 
Arm-drop, 101, 126; as affected by 
tempo, 158 ; controlled, 151 ; co- 
ordination and incoordination in, 
158 ; forced, 162 ; free, 150 ; see also 
Arm-movement, Arm-lift 
Arm-legato, 177-82; effect on arm- 
weight, 178, 182 ; effect on control, 
177 ; effect on peroussiveness, 177 

387 


Arm-lift, 149, 181 ; see also Weight- 
release 

Arm-movement, in arpeggio, 268 ff ; 
in finger-stroke, 238 ; see also Arm- 
drop, Arm-lift 

Arm-position, and relaxation, 124 ; and 
weight distribution, 128 ff; in 
relation to keyboard, 149 
Arm-rotation, in tremolo, 194 
Arm-shift, in arpeggio, 263, 266; in 
mixed passages, 291, 292 ; in scales, 
257 ; on black keys, 368 
Arm-staccato, 203 ; co5rdination in, 
203 ; fixation in, 203 
Arm-weight, 147 f ; and arm-position, 
147; effect on arm-legato, 178; 
individual differences in, 297 f ; 
in staccato, 198 ; in tremolo, 183 ; 
in vibrato, 210; see also Weight- 
transfer 

Arm-writing, 119 

Arpeggio, 262-76 ; finger-movement 
in, 270 ; intensity effects in, 273 ff ; 
lateral arm-shift in, 273 ; strength of 
finger-muscles in, 275 ; thumb- 
action in, 263, 270 ; weight-transfer 
in, 262 ; wrist-movement in, 270 
Arterioles, 67 
Association areas, 66, 309 
Asymmetry of movement, in arpeggio, 
267, 273; in chord-tremolo, 190; 
in finger-stroke, 228; in lateral 
arm-shift, 163 ; in scales, 253 f ; in 
tremolo, 22, 183, 187, 193 f; see 
also Positive and Negative move- 
ment 

Axis, of fore-arm rotation, 16, 22, 
191 

Axis of rotation, in tremolo, 186 f; 
also p. 16 

BaUistio Movement, see Wurf Bewegung, 
SchUuder Bewegung 
“ Bell ” tone, 342 

Biceps, 41 ; see also Shoulder and 
Upper-arm 

Blood, 70 ; see also Circulation 
Bloodvessels, 67 
BracUalis, 41 
Brachio-radialis, 42 



388 


INDEX 


Brain, 65 
Brittle ” tone, 344 

Galando, effect on lateral arm-move- 
ment, 170 
GaviaMle, 244 
Capillaries, 67 

Garpal Bones, see Hand, Wrist 
Cessation of tone, 181 
Change of direction, in movement, 
162 f ; see also Movement, Angular 
movement. Curved movement 
Change of finger, in tone-repetition, 247 
Chord-tremolo, 190 

Circulation, 66 ff ; effect on muscles, 
67, 68 ; variations in* 69, 70, 307 
Circulatory system, 66 ff 
Color, in tone-quality, 342 
Complex movement, demands coordina- 
tion, 285; in piano playing, 292 
Composition of forces, 10 
Compressibility, 3 
Conductors, 64 

Continuity of movement, 291 ; see also 
Curved movement 
Contractility, 50, 91 
Contraction of muscle, 51 ; as effected 
by direction, 110; degrees of, 52; 
duration of, 108; independent of 
spatial relationship, 118; simple, 
51 ; sustained, 51 
Control of tone, see Tone-control 
Controlled arm-drop, 151 ; effect of 
intensity on, 154 ; speed in, 151 
Coordination, 58, 81, 88, 90, 93, 99-123 ; 
and relaxation, 99 ; as affected by 
external resistance, 116 ; as affected 
by force, 112; by intensity, 102, 
172, 289; by range, 102, 115; by 
size of muscles, 119 ; by speed, 102, 
140, 289 ; by time-relationship, 120; 
definition of movement, 99 ; as deter- 
mined by antagonists and synergists, 
122; as determined by muscular 
strength, 302 ; determined by resist- 
ance, 97 ; determined by size of 
hand, 300 ; determined by strength 
of hand, 302 ; in arm-lift, 149 ; in 
arm-staccato, 203, 204, 207 ; in arm- 
stroke, 158 ; in arpeggio, 264 ff ; in 
controlled arm-drop, 161 ; in forced 
stroke, 162, 156 ; in free arm-drop, 
150; in hand-staccato, 202; in 
miscellaneous movements, 282 f, 292, 
296 ; in vibrato, 210, 213 ; opposed 
to isolation, 290, 294 ; necessarily 
wasteful in energy, 81 ; psychological 
basis of, 376 ; relation to relaxation, 
101 ; shift of function in, 26, 28, 


34, 48 ; variations in, 102 ; see also 
Incoordination 
Coplanar forces, 10 
Cortical areas, 66 f, 71 
Couple, 11 

Grescendo, and weight-transfer, 142; 
in lateral arm-shift, 167, 171; in 
staccato, 200, 206 ; in tremolo, 192 
" Crisp ” tone, 341 

Curved finger, 220 ff ; advantage of, 
222 ; compared with flat fibager, 222 ; 
effect on arm, 224; effect on key- 
movement, 227 ; mechanical nature 
of, 220 

Curved movement, 29, 78 ; character- 
istic of single joints, 75, 76; in 
lateral arm-shift, 161 ff; in miscel- 
laneous movements, 365 ; mechanical 
advantage of, 30 

Curvilinear movement, see Curved 
movement 
Cysts, 306 

Descent of arm, see Arm-drop 
Dexterity, and inertia, 132 
DiminiteTido, and weight-transfer, 142 ; 
in lateral arm-shift, 167 ; in 
staccato, 200 

Double-jointedness, 219, 324 ff ; 

control of, 330; see also Hyper- 
relaxation, Hand-types, Skeletal 
structure 

Drugs, effect on movement, 309 
''Dry "tone, 244, 342 
Duration, effect on tone-quality, 339, 
340, 341 ; effect on style, 373 f 
Dynamics, as affecting style, 370 ff ; in 
lateral arm-shift, 166 ff ; in scales, 
260 f ; in staccato, 205 f ; in 
tremolo, 192 f ; see also Force, 
Intensity, Tension 

Dynamograph records of, weight- 
transfer in arm-legato, 182 ; weight- 
transfer in tremolo, 185 

Effectors, 64 

Elasticity, 3; absent in key-release, 
353 ; of muscles, 91, 214 ; of piano 
key, 173, 197 

Elbow-joint, affected by finger-stroke, 
85 ; curved movement at, 76 ; 
description of, 15 ; horizontal move- 
ment at, 26, 27 ; range of move- 
ment at, 16, 31, 36 ; vertical move- 
ment of, 21 

Elliptical finger-stroke, 228 
Emotion and metabolism, 309 
Excess weight, effect on key-action. 



INDEX 


389 


Exercise, effect on muscle, 53 

Expansibility, 3 

External force, 90, 94 ; effect on 
muscle, 96 

External resistance, effect on coordina- 
tion, 116 ff ; effect on movement, 
86 ; effect on muscular contraction, 
109 

Fall-board, effect on movement, 280 f, 
364 

Fatigue, affects relaxation rate, 56; 
affects speed, 80 ; cause of, in 
vibrato, 213 ; caused by range, 320, 
334 ; contraction rate, 66 ; effect on 
recovery, 67 ; effect on type of 
movement, 79 ; in finger-staccato, 
216 ; in muscle, 66 ; location of, 
57 ; result of, in coordination, 159 ; 
spread of, 57 

Fibres of muscle, 50 

Fingering, affected by accentuation, 
360 f ; affected by speed, 352 ; 
determined by mechanical differences, 
300, 321, 334 f ; effect on legato, 
351 ; effect on movement, 278 ff ; 
in octave scales, 287 ; effect on 
tone-quality, 361 f ; in tremolo, 
189 

Finger-joints, 18; curved movement 
at, 76; horizontal movement at, 
28 ; range of, 19, 32 ; vertical 
movement at, 24 

Finger-key percussion, 156, 229 ff 

Finger-lift, determined by muscle- 
strength, 305 ; in active and passive 
movement, 92 f; in finger-stroke, 
235 

Finger-movement, 38 ; as affected by 
speed, 111 ; effect of intensity on, 
234; effect on adjoining parts, 84; 
effect on elbow, 86 ; effect on 
weight-transfer, 139 ; effect on wrist, 
85 ; in accented tones, 359 ; in 
arpeggio, 270 f , 276 ; in hand- 

staccato, 201 ; in scales, 251 f ; in 
tremolo, 187 ; lateral, 87, 89 ; 

practice in pp degrees, 101 ; range 
of, 320 ; t^es of stroke, 38 

Finger-position, 32, 44, 45 ; and 
hand-movement, 212 f; and key- 
resistance, 227 f 

Finger-repetition, effect on weight- 
transfer, 141 f 

Fingers, muscles acting on, 43, 45 

Finger-sequence, as affected by speed, 
140 ; effect on ‘weight-transfer, 
137 

Finger-staccato, 215 f 


Finger-stroke, 217-50 ; and tempo, 
248 f ; as affected by key-impact, 
82, 232 ; effect on adjoining finger, 
88, 89, 217 ; intensity of, 234 ff ; 
leverage in, 218 ; muscular con- 
traction in. Ill ; need for, 376 
Finger-technique, value of, 290 
Finger-tip, 335 f; movement of, in 
various strokes. 220 f 
Finger-tremolo, 188 f 
Fixation, 77 ; and relaxation, 126 f ; 
determined by intensity, 87, 156, 
237 ; determined by position, 125 ; 
determined by range, 116; effect 
on fingering, 360 f ; in accentuation. 
359 ; in action and reaction, 83 ; 
in j^ger-stroke, 232, 237 ; in high 
finger-lift, 236 ; in staccato, 200 f, 
205 ; in vibrato, 211 ; necessary in 
piano playing, 68, 101, 131, 167; 
see also Stiffness, Spread 
Flat-finger, 218 ff, 316 ; advantages in, 
219 ; compared with curved finger, 
222 ; effect on arm, 224 ; effect on 
key-movement, 227 ; illustrations of, 
220, 221 

Flexion, muscles acting on wrist, 43; 
of elbow-joint, 15, 21 ; of fingers, 24; 
of wrist, 23 

Force, effects in lever, 6 f ; effect on 
coordination, 112 ff ; effect on 
muscular action, 54 ; effect on tone- 
quality, 338 ; effect on weight- 
distribution, 128, 130; varies with 
speed of movement, 102; see also 
Forces 

Forced arm-descent, 152 f 
Forces, composition of, 9 ff ; distribu- 
tion of, in finger-stroke, 233 ; resolu- 
tion of, 11 ; see also Force 
Fore-arm, muscles acting on, 41 
Fore-arm rotation, effect on tremolo, 
17 ; in relation to vertical move- 
ment, 22 ; principle of, 22 ; skeletal 
basis of, 16 

Fore-arm staccato, 203 f 
Fore-arm tremolo, 186 ff 
Forward movement, 292; in mixed 
figures, 368 ; in scales, 257 
Fourth-finger, limitation of movement 
in, 45 f 

Free arm-drop, 160 

Free-body, characteristic of physio- 
logical movement, 102 ff ; in lateral 
arm-shift, 165 

Free-movement, not used in technique, 
109 

Fulcrum, change in position, 82; see 
also Levers 



390 INDEX 


Geometries, determined by complexity, 
370 ; determined by kinesthetic 
talent, 284; determined by range, 
370; of arpeggio, 263; of scales, 
257 ff ; of lateral arm-movement, 
160 ; of movement, 75-81, 291, 364 ; 
see also Miscellaneous movements 
“Good*' tone, 349; see also Tone 
qualities 

Gr^ed response, of muscle, 52, 53 
“ Grasping reflex,** 18, 44, 316 
Gravity, 81, 95 ; effect on active and 
passive movements, 95 ; effect on 
lateral arm-shift, 168 

Hand, 311-36; affected by finger- 
stroke, 86; curved movement of, 
76 ; horizontal movement of, 29 ; 
muscles acting on, 42 ; muscles in, 
88 ; physiological division into parts, 
44, 315 f; size of, 312, 317, 318: 
straight-line movement of, 77 ; sub- 
division of, 361 ; vertical movement 
of, 20 ; weight of, in staccato, 198 
Hand-extension, 212; see also Wrist 
extension and flexion 
Hand-joints, 17 

Hand-knuckles, see Hand-joints 
Hand-movement in arpeggio, 266 f; 
in chromatic octaves, 288 ; in scales, 
258 

Hand-muscles, 43 f, 88 ; in staccato, 
202 

Hand-position, 19, 28, 31 f, 38, 45 : 
affected by finger formation, 312; 
affected by finger-position, 29, 212 ; 
affected by impact reaction, 82; 
affected by intensity, 113, 114; 
affected by strength, 303, 305; in 
tremolo, 186, 188 ; in staccato, 202 ; 
types of, 314 ff 
Hand-staccato, 198, 322 
Hand-type, 326 ff ; effect on move- 
ment, 279 

Hand-weight, in staccato, 198 
High finger-lift, 236 
ffigh-^st, 313, 320, 322 
Hinge-joint, limitation of movement at, 
27 

Horizontal arm-position, 183 
Horizontal movements, of elbow, 27; 

of fingers, 29 ; of radio-ulnar joint, 

- 27 ; of shoulder, 26 ; of shoulder 
girdle, 25 ; of various modes of 
production, 29 ; of wrist, 28 
Hufnerus, 75 ; see also Shoulder 
Humerus rotation, 27; in fore-arm 
staccato, 204 
Hyper-yelaxft^on, 61, 94 


Hyper-tension, in vibrato, 209 

Hypo-relaxation, 62 

Illusion, in tone qualities, 340, 342, 
346 f, 354 f, 356 

Illustrations of, action and reaction, 
84-6, 238 ; active and passive 
movement, 93, 109 ; angles of 

muscular pull, 7, 201, 218; arm- 
legato, 179, 180, 182; arm-stroke, 
153, 155; arm-weight distribution, 
129; arm-writing, 119; arpeggio, 
264. f. 266, f. 267, 269, f. 270, 1 271, 
274; composition of forces, 10; 
degrees of flexion and extension, 
f. 324, 325. 326. 327, 328. 329, 330 ; 
double-jointedness, f. 324, 330 ; 

effect of speed on muscle-contraction, 
107 ; elbow flexion, 21 ; finger 
ascent, 197, 235 ; finger flexion, 24, f. 
88; ^ger-movement, 84, 85, 86; 
finger-movement in scales, f. 252, 
f . 256, 257 ; fmger repetition, 141 ; 
finger staccato, 215; finger-stroke, 
84. 140, 145, 220, 221, 222, 224, 
226, 227, 230, f. 332, 333; fibnger- 
key percussion, 231, 232, 234, 240 ; 
fore-arm muscles, f. 42; fore-arm 
rotation, 22; hand muscles, f, 43, 
44, 88 ; hand-position, f. 32, 304, 
312, f. 314; hand-staccato, 198, f. 
202, 208; hand-types, 317; hori- 
zontal movements, 26, 27 ; inco- 
ordinated movement, 157 ; individual 
differences, f, 298 ; key ascent, 197, 
353, 354; lateral arm-movement, 
161-71 ; levers, 5 ; martellato, 260 ; 
mechanical arm, f* 124; melodic 
accentuation, 358 ; miscellaneous 
movements, f. 284, 290, 292, 293; 
muscular hand-position, f. 335 ; 
non-isolation of movement, 238 ; 
parallel forces, 11 ; parallelo^am of 
forces, 9; parallelepiped of forces, 
10; portamento, 260; recording 
key-movement, 1 230 ; shift of 
function, 204, 242 ; shoulder move- 
ment, 75; shoulder-muscles, f. 40; 
shoulder rotation, 20 ; skeletal himd- 
position, f. 335 ; spring-release, 173 ; 
style, f, 363, 366, 367, 369, 371, 372, 
373; tapping, 206; time of contrac- 
tion.llO, 111, 121 ; tonal-illusion, 357 ; 
tone-q\iaJities, 337-61 ; tone-qualities 
in finger-stroke, 244, 245 ; tonus, 61 ; 
tremolo, 184, 186, f. 187 ; trunk 
relaxation, 20; vibrato, 210, 211, 
212 ; weight-transfer in thumb- 
action, 144 ; wei^t-transfer in trill. 



INDEX 


391 


136, 137, 139, 142 ; wrist-bones, f. 
323 ; wrist flexion, 23 ; wrist-jerk 
in staccato, 199, 200 
Imagery, 356 f; in movement, 87; 
see also Illusion 

Impact, effect on smoothness, 163 
Incoordination, 58, 94, 99-123, 157, 
295, 346 f, 372; as affected by 
speed, 284, 288 ; definition of move- 
ment, 99 ; effect on intensity, 159 ; 
effect on range, 159 ; in angular 
movement, 78 ; in arm-lift, 181 ; 
in arm-stroke, 158 ; in miscellaneous 
movements, 282 ff, 285, 286, 368 ; 
in reversal of direction, 208 ; pro- 
duced by external resistance, 117; 
see also Coordination 
Index-finger, 44, 315 
Individual differences, 297-336 ; 
anatomical source of, 297; circu- 
latory, 71 ; determined by age, 
300 ; in arm-len^h, 299 ; in arm- 
weight, 297 f ; in arpeggio, 267 ; 
in body-weight, 299 ; in circula- 
tion, 307 f; in fingers, 299; in 
metabolism, 309 ; in muscles, 300 f ; 
in neural function, 308 ; in strength, 
302 f 

Inertia, definition of, 3; effect on 
position, 131 ; effect on speed, 172 ; 
effect on technique, 132 ; effect on 
tremolo, 188 ; effect on vibrato, 
216 ; effect on weight-transfer, 146 
Initial contraction, 104 ; a typical 
coordination, 110 
Initial lift, 168 

Insertion of muscles, 47, 91 ; see also 
Origin 

Integrative action, 66 ; see also 
Coordination, Spread of function. 
Spread of tension 

Int^ity, affected by range, 367 ; effect 
on arpeggio, 273 ff.; effect on co- 
ordination, 107, 112 ; effect on 
finger-stroke, 234 f ; effect on inco- 
Srdinated movement, 286, 288 ; effect 
on miscellaneous movements, 282, 
286; effect on style, 373 f; effect 
on tone-qualities, 339 ff, 344 ; effect 
on weight-transfer, 136 f ; spread of 
muscles with, 113; see also Ampli- 
tude, Dynamics, !Force, Tension, 
Intensity of Tone 

Intensity of tone, effect on accuracy, 
172 f. ; effect on arm-drop, 154 ff. ; 
effect on lateral arm-shift, 166 f.; 
effect on tremolo, 189, 190 f., 194; 
in scales, 260; parallels rigidity, 239, 
243 


iTtierossei, 43 

Isolation, 21, 77, 80, 83, 85, 87, 150 ; 
absent in tremolo, 183; in finger- 
stroke, 237, 239 ; opposed to action 
and reaction, 83 ; opposed to 
coordination, 224, 294, 296 ; opposed 
to muscular structure, 41, 47, 290, 
294 ; opposed to skeletal structure, 
34, 39 ; see also Coordination, 
Spread 

Joint-position, and stiffness, 131 
Joint resistance, 61 

Joints, 14 ff; general description of, 
14; types of movement possible, 
75 ff 

Key-ascent, 182 ; independent of finger 
ascent, 196, 353 

Keyboard, limitations of, 280 f; rela- 
tion to activity and passivity, 96 ff ; 
relation to hand, 311 ff ; relation to 
vertical and horizontal movement, 
30 ff 

Key-release, 352 f; in staccato, 196; 
see also Key-ascent 

Key-resistance, and finger position, 
226, 227 

^*Kick-off,»» 172 f 
Latent period, 51 

Lateral arm-movement, 105 ff, 160-74; 
accuracy of, 288 ; in arpeggio, 273 ; 
in complex movements, 366 ; in 
scales, 259 ; records of, 163 ff ; 
theoretical analysis of, 160 ff 
Law of least effort, 90, 98, 106, 114, 
115, 159 ; effect on range, 118 
Legato, and weight-transfer, 141, 146 ; 

as determinant of style, 373 
Lever, action of, 6ff; classes of, 5; 
variations in efficiency, 7 f ; in finger- 
stroke, 218 

Lightness and coordination, 289 
“Looseness,” 61, 62, 117, 118, 325, 
329, 331 
Lwmbncales, 43 

Martellato, 197 ; in scales, 261 
Mass, effect on arm-staccato, 203, 289 ; 
effect on hand-staccato, 198, 205, 289 ; 
in vibrato, 211 
Mechanical action, laws of, 4 
Mechanical appliances, 303 f 
Mechanical arm, 124 ff; in vibrato, 
209, 214 ; recording tone-quality, 348 
Mechanical principles, 3-12 ; in arched 
hand, 249 f; in joint articulation, 
27, 28 ; of double- jointedness, 330 



392 


INDEX 


Melody accentuation, 358 f 
Metabolism, 309 

Method of recording, finger-stroke, 230; 
lateral arm-movement, 164; mus- 
cular action, 106; weight-transfer, 
134 

Mid-range of movement; effect on 
accuracy and ease, 31, 33 
Miscellaneous movements, 277-96, 
364-76 

Momentum, and weight-transfer, 137 ; 

see also Mass, Inertia, Lightness 
Movement, combinations of, 25 f; 
determined by size of muscles, 119 ; 
direction of, 81 ; effect on speed of, 
102 ; generated in various ways, 33 ; 
variety in keyboard, 33 ; visual 
aspect, 36, 48, 81, 83, 97, 180 
Movement-phase, 95, 195, 215 
Multi-planar movements, 29 ; see also 
Miscellaneous movements 
Muscles, 40-9 ; anatomy of, 40 ; 
as stabilizers of joints, 15 ; contract- 
ility of, 50 ; contraction in arm-drop, 
156 ; controlling excess movement of, 
329 ; correlation with force, 107 ; 
division of function of, 41 ; fore-arm, 
42; hand, 43; individual differences 
in, 300 f ; integrative action of, 46, 
47, 48 ; origin and insertion of, 47, 
91 ; pathology of, 304 f ; shape of, 
40 ; shoulder, 40 ; states and 
properties of, 50-63; structure of, 
50 ; thumb, 46 ; upper arm, 41 
Muscular action, 51 ff ; mechanical 
study of, 106, 124 ; speed effects on, 
103 ; time of, in staccato, 201 f, 
208 ; in stroke of finger, 222 f ; 
in tone-qualities, 339-50 
Muscular state, independent of spatial 
relationship, 92 f , 94 
Muscular work, 55 

Nail- joint, " breaking in ** of, 45, 

225 f, 321 ; effect on key-movement, 

226 

Narrow hand, effect on style, 334 f 
Negative movement, 96, 97, 215 
Nerves, 64 ff 

Neural-^stem, 64 ff ; stimulus needed 
for muscular contraction, 91 
Neuron, 64 
Noise-element, 354 

Non-Ugato, in arm-shift, 283; in 
arpeggio, 271 ; in tremolo, 191 ; 
in tone-quality, 350 

Non-percussion, in finger-stroke, 231 f 
Normal hand-position, 32, 149, 314 ff ; 
codrdjnfition in, 100 


Octaves, chromatic 286 ; effect on 
hand-position, 313 ; scales, 259 ff 
Origin, determines line of action, 116 ; 
of horizontal movements, 29 ; of 
muscles, 47, 91 ; of vertical move- 
ments, 25 

Pantograph records, of lateral arm- 
shift, 164 ff 

Parabolic motion, characteristic of free 
bodies, 166 f 

Parallel forces, 10 ; composition of, 11 
Parallelogram of forces, 9, 10 
Parallelepiped of forces, 10 
Passive movement, 90 
Passivity, 90-8 ; degrees of, 95 
Pathology, of individual differences, 304 
** Pearly/' tone, 350 
Pectoralis Major, contraction of, 105 ff 
Pedagogy, of accuracy, 172 ; of active 
and passive movement, 90 f, 96 ; of 
arm descent, 152 ; of arpeggio, 
273 ; of double- jointedness, 332 f ; 
of equal intensity, 367 ; of finger- 
lift, 235; of finger-stroke, 89, 219, 
223, 249, 350 ; of individual 

differences, 303; of inertia, 146; 
of isolation, 86 f ; of nail- joint, 
225; of preparation, 166 ; of staccato, 
202 ; of thumb-action, 254 ; of tonal 
balance, 286, 359 f ; of tremolo, 
194 ; of weight transfer, 146 
Pedal, 374 

Percussion, effect on finger-stroke, 
231 f; effect on weight-transfer, 
135, 144 f; finger-key, 229 ff; in 
arm-drop, 152, 154; in arm-legato, 
177 ; in tone-qualities, 243, 339, 340 
Phalanges, 17 ; see also Hand and 
Pinger movement 

Phase of movement, 95, 97 ; in tremolo, 
195 

Photographs, see Illustrations 
Physiological organism, 13 
Plasticity, 3 

Playing position, as determined by 
skeleton, 30 ff 

Playing-unit, effect on finger-stroke, 
240 f; effect on movement, 178; 
affected by speed, 133 
Portaimnio, in scales, 260 
Position, and arm weight, 147; as 
determined by intensity, 113, 114; 
demands some fixation, 124 
Positive movement, 96, 97, 215; eee 
also Active movement 
Practice, affected by tempo, 283 ; 
need for resistance in, 96 ; need for 
tone in, 86 ; speed of, 80 



INDEX 393 


Preparation, in arpeggio, 268 ; in 
lateral arm-shift, 166 ; in movement, 
87, 160 ; in scales, 254 ff 
Pronation, 16 f, 43, 183 

Quiet hand, determined by fingering, 
279 ; in arpeggio, 266 

Radio-ulnar articulation, curved move- 
ment at, 76 ; description of, 16 ; 
horizontal movement at, 27 ; move- 
ment in tremolo, 183 ; range of 
movement in, 16 ; use in keyboard 
movements, 36 ; vertical movement 
at, 22 

Radius, see Pore-arm rotation 
Range of movement, determined by 
physiological structure, 31 ; deter- 
mined by skeletal structure, 323 ; 
determined by tempo, 169 ; effect 
on control, 177 ; effect on coordina- 
tion, 48, 115 ff, 118, 293; effect on 
fatigue, 320 ; effect on lateral arm- 
movement, 170 ff ; effect on tremolo, 
191 ; joint- movement, 319 f ; varia- 
tions in, 33, 39, 48, 204 ; in elbow, 
15; in finger-joints, 18; in hand- 
joints, 17 ; in radio-ulnar joint, 16 ; 
in wrist, 17 

Reaction, from force-impact, 82 ff ; 

see also Action 
Receptor, 64 
Records, see Illustrations 
Rectilinear movement, see Straight-line 
movement 
Reflex action, 64 

Relaxation, 124-33 ; and arm- 

position, 124 f ; and fixation, 126 ; 
and weight-distribution, 127 ; effect 
on smoothness, 178, 179 ; in arpeggio, 
274 ; in coordination, 120 ; in 
finger-stroke, 241 f ; in miscellaneous 
movements, 286; in staccato, 200; 
in tone-production, 166 ; mechanical 
nature of, 124 ; of trunk, 20 ; physio- 
logical nature of, 69 ff ; relation to 
coordination, 99 ff ; relation to 

intensity, 83 ; varies with individuals, 
302 f. See also Stiffness, Rigidity, 
Fixation, Spread of tension 
Renaud's disease, 69, 307 
Repeated tones, in finger-stroke, 229, 
246 f 

Repetition, effect on coordination, 120, 
208 ; effect on movement, 78 f, 283, 
296, 369 ; effect on neural system, 71 
Rejpression, 346 f 
Resistance, needed in practice, 96 
Resolution of forces, Ilf 


Resume, 376 ff 

Retardation, affected by playing-unit 
240 ; in finger-stroke, 228, 233 
Reverse movement, 162 ; see also 
Asymmetry, Active movement. Posi- 
tive movement 

Rigidity, 3, 57, 61 ; chemical, 57 ; 
effect on arm-legato, 180 ; effect 
on lateral arm-shift, 167 ; effect 
on percussiveness, 178 ; in finger- 
stroke, 241 f ; in tone-production, 
166 ; in vibrato, 209 ; muscular, 57 ; 
necessary at times, 289 ; necessary 
in technique, 58 ; relation to intensity, 
83 ; see also Stiffness, Fixation 
Ritard, in lateral arm-movement, 169 
Roll-Beu)egu7ig, 134, 180, 188 f 
Rotation, 290 ; effect on horizontal 
movement, 22 ; effect on vertical 
movement, 21 ; in shoulder, 76 ; in 
tremolo, 188 ff ; principle of 
mechanical motion, 30 ; relation to 
translation, 49 
Round tone, 246 

Scales, 251-61 ; and weight-transfer, 
143 f, 251 ; thumb-action in, 262 
Schleuder-Rewegung, 153 
** Shallow '' tone, 246 
Shape of muscles, 54 
Shift of function, 23, 28, 46, 79, 82, 
149; as determined by range of 
movement, 116, 119 ; in arm- 

staccato, 204 ; in tremolo, 187, 194 
Shock, 156, 163, 178; see also Per- 
cussion, Impact 

Shoulder-girdle, effect on keyboard 
movements, 35 ; horizontal move- 
ment of, 25 ; vertical movement of, 

19 

Shoulder- joint, diversity of movement 
at, 31, 35 ; effect on keyboard move- 
ments, 36 ; in normal arm-position, 
101 ; horizontal movement at, 26 ; 
muscles acting on, 40 ; type of move- 
ment at, 75 ; vertical movement at, 

20 

Shoulder-position, and relaxation, 128 ; 

and weight-distribution, 128 
Silent practice, 86 f 
Simple contraction, of muscle, 61 
** Singing ” tone, 244, 346 
Size of muscles, effect on function, 119 
Skeletal position, 39, 113, 131, 333; 
in accentuation, 360; in staccato, 
206 

Skeletal structure, 13-39; effect on 
coordination, 326 ff ; general descrip- 
tion of, 13 ; wrist region, 323 f 



394 INDEX 


“ Slack in tendon, 62, 94 
Sostmuto touch, 200 
" Sparkling ” tone, 339 
Speed, and inertia, 132, 172; and 
rigidity, 156; depends on circula- 
tion, 69; effect in arpeggio, 265; 
effect in scales, 256 f ; effect on 
coordination, 102, 104; effect on 
jSnger-stroke, 112, 229; effect on 
lateral arm-shift, 168 ; effect on 
movement, 282 ; effect on muscles, 
101, 108 ; effect on staccato, 207 f ; 
effect on weight-transfer, 137 ff ; 
in controlled arm-drop, 151 ; in free 
arm-drop, 150 ; of muscular con- 
traction, 102, 155 ; of practice, 80 ; 
relation to accuracy, 172; relation 
to lightness, 172 ; relation to tremolo, 
191 ; relation to weight-transfer, 
180 ; see also Agogic effects. Tempo, 
Levers 

Spinal-cord, 64 

Spread of tension, 63, 83 f , 87, 89, 106 ; 
independent of type of movement, 
114; in finger-stroke, 236 f; in 
staccato, 207 f; in tremolo, 192; 
with increase of force, 113; with 
increase of speed, 108 ; see also 
Isolation, Fixation 
Spring-release, 172 

Staccato, 196-216; and imagination, 
357 ; and key-release, 353 ; definition 
of, 196 ; determined by key-release, 
196 ; duration of, 52, 197 ; dynamic 
variations in, 205 f; finger-action 
in, 201 ; hand-weight in, 198 ; in 
scales, 260 ; reversal of direction in, 
197 ; teaching of, 202 ; wrist, 36 
Stiffness, and joint-position, 131 ; 
determined by range, 322 ; result of 
muscular fiixation, 321 ; result of 
physiological structure, 321 ; result 
of temperature, 68 
" Stiff-wrist,^* 101, 213 
Straight-line movement, as in- 
coordinated, 78 ; involves more than 
one joint, 76 ; see also Angular move- 
ment 

Stren^h of muscle, effect on hand- 
position, 303, 304 f ; effect on move- 
ment, 55, 302; effect on tremolo, 
194; in finger-stroke, 219; individual 
differences in, 302 f; needed in 
arpeggio, 275 

Stretch, affects hand-position, 316 
Stretch-exercises, 39 
Style, 362-75; determined by agogic 
and dynamic variations, 370 ; deter- 
mined by anatomical differences. 


321, 334, 336 ; determined by 

physical variants, 355 ; of composers, 
372 ff; recording of, 362; shown 
in geometries, 364 
Sybaryoomus, 42 
Supination, 16 f, 43, 183 
** Surface ** tone, 244 
Sustained contraction, of muscle, 51 
Synergists, 122 ; see also Antagonists 
Synesthesia, 308 

Talent, shown in movement, 284 
Tapering fingers, 319, 336 
Tapping test, 206 
Teachhag, see Pedagogy 
Technique, depends upon various 
sense-organs, 71 ; determined by 
geometries, 364; essentially curved 
movement, 78 ; involves various 
joints, 77 ; see Coordination 
Temperature, effect on muscle, 56 ; on 
circulation, 68 

Tempo, effect on arm-drop, 158 ; 
effect oh arpeggio, 265, 271 ff ; effect 
on finger-stroke, 248 ; effect on 
range, 159; see also Agogic effects. 
Speed 

Tendon, action in coordination, 116; 

snapping of, 306 
Tension, 54, 59 

Tetanus,** of muscle, 50, 52 ; volun- 
tary, in vibrato, 211 
Thumb, muscles acting on, 46, 333 
Thumb-action, in arpeggio, 37, 263, 
270, 273; in scales, 37, 143, 252, 
254, 258 

Thumb-joints, 18 

Time-relationship, in coordination, 120, 
122, 285 

Tissues, effect on movement, 329 f 
Tone-combinations, 355 
Tone-control, as affected by arm- 
weight, 298 ; by muscular strength, 
303; in arm-drops, 152, 164; in 
arm-legato, 177 

Tone-qualities, 337-61 ; ** beU,** 342 ; 

** brittle,** 344; “crisp,** 341; 
depend on force variation, 338 f ; 
determined by fingering, 351 ; deter- 
mined by finger-tip, 335 ; determined 
by finger-stroke, 243 ff ; determined 
by physiological structure, 306 ; 

“ dry,*' 342 ; elements of, 354 f ; 
“good,** 349; largely imaginary, 
356 f; of single tones, 355; 

“ pearly,*’ 360 ; recording of, 337 f ; 

“ singing,** 345 ; “ sparkling,** 339 ; 

“ surface,** 348 f ; “ velvety,*' 340 
Tonus, of muscle, 59, 61 



INDEX 395 


Tremolo, 36, 183-96; muscular con- 
traction in, 183 ; opposed to weight- 
transfer, 185 ; relation to width of 
interval, 186 
Triceps, 41 

Trills, and tremolo, 186 f ; and weight- 
transfer, 136 fE 

"Twitch,” dependence upon intensity 
of stimulus, 61 ; of muscle, 50, 51 

Ulna, see Fore-arm rotation 
Upper-arm rotation, effect on hand- 
movement, 21 

" Velvety ” tone, 340 
Vertical movements, 19 ; how generated, 
20 f; not restricted to any part of 
arm, 19 ff; of arm, 149-69; of 
elbow, 21 ; of fingers, 23 ; of shoulder, 
20 ; of wrist, 23 ; radio-uJnar 
articulation, 22 

Vibrato, 209 ff ; neural phase, 213 
Violin technique, 268 
Visual aspect of movement, not same 
as muscular, 36, 48, 81, 83, 97, 180 
Voluntary movement, tetanic in 
character, 62 

Weight, arm- weight in normal position 
101 ; definition of, 3 ; in arpeggio, 
262 f ; in staccato, 198 
Weight-distribution, 1 ; and relaxa- 
tion, 127 ; in arm-legato, 180 f 


Weight-release, how controlled, 181 ; 
in staccato, 200 

Weight-traniffer, 134r-48, 290, 371 ; 
and arm-position, 130, 133 ; and 
relaxation, 130 ; depends upon 
degree of relaxation, 100; deter- 
mined by finger sequence, 137 ff ; 
determined by inertia, 146; deter- 
mined by intensity, 136, 136 f ; 
determined by percussiveness, 136 ; 
determined by speed, 137 ; how best 
taught, 146; in arm-legato, 180; 
in arpeggio, 262, 274; in staccato, 
200 ; in tremolo, 184 f ; mechanical 
determinants, 136 ; mechanics of, 
134 

Wrist, 17 ; affected by finger-stroke, 
85 ; curved movement at, 76 ; flexion 
and extension, 31, 36, 322 ; horizontal 
movement at, 28 ; in staccato, 199 ; 
lateral movement, 31, 37 ; movement 
in arm-legato, 178; movement in 
arpeggio, 270; muscles acting on, 
43 ; natural position of, 31 ; range 
of movement in, 17 ; vertical move- 
ment at, 23 

Wrist- jerk, in staccato, 199 ; measure 
of, 199 

Wrist-position, in finger-stroke, 247 f 

Wurf^Bewegung, 163 

X-Kay, of hand-knuckles, 326; of 
nail-joint, 326 ; of thumb, 326 ; 
of wrist region, 323 


BrirUed in Great Britain by Stephen Amtin Sms, Ltd,, IJertfard, 













